7:1 And king Solomon sent, and took Chiram out of Tyre,
7:2 the son of a widow woman; and he was of the tribe of Nephthalim, and his father was a Tyrian; a worker in brass, and accomplished in art and skill and knowledge to work every work in brass: and he was brought in to king Solomon, and he wrought all the works.
7:3 And he cast the two pillars for the porch of the house: eighteen cubits was the height of each pillar, and a circumference of fourteen cubits encompassed it, even the thickness of the pillar: the flutings were four fingers wide, and thus was the other pillar formed.
7:4 And he made two molten chapiters to put on the heads of the pillars: five cubits was the height of one chapiter, and five cubits was the height of the other chapiter.
7:5 And he made two ornaments of net-work to cover the chapiters of the pillars; even a net for one chapiter, and a net for the other chapiter.
7:6 And hanging work, two rows of brazen pomegranates, formed with net-work, hanging work, row upon row: and thus he framed the ornaments for the second chapiter.
7:7 And he set up the pillars of the porch of the temple: and he set up the one pillar, and called its name Jachum: and he set up the second pillar, and called its name Boloz.
7:8 And on the heads of the pillars he made lily-work against the porch, of four cubits,
7:9 and a chamber over both the pillars, and above the sides an addition equal to the chamber in width.
7:10 And he made the sea, ten cubits from one rim to the other, the same was completely circular round about: its height was five cubits, and its circumference thirty-three cubits.
7:11 And stays underneath its rim round about compassed it ten cubits round;
7:12 and its rim was as the work of the rim of a cup, a lily-flower, and the thickness of it was a span.
7:13 And there were twelve oxen under the sea; three looking to the north, and three looking to the west, and three looking to the south, and three looking to the east: and all their hinder parts were inward, and the sea was above upon them.
7:14 And he made ten brazen bases: five cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth of it, and its height was six cubits.
7:15 And this work of the bases was formed with a border to them, and there was a border between the ledges.
7:16 And upon their borders between the projections were lions, and oxen, and cherubs: and on the projections, even so above, and also below were the places of lions and oxen, hanging work.
7:17 And there were four brazen wheels to one base; and there were brazen bases, and their four sides answering to them, side pieces under the bases.
7:18 And there were axles in the wheels under the base. And the height of one wheel was a cubit and a half.
7:19 And the work of the wheels was as the work of chariot wheels: their axles, and their felloes, and the rest of their work, were all molten.
7:20 The four side-pieces were at the four corners of each base; its shoulders were formed of the base.
7:21 And on the top of the base half a cubit was the size of it, there was a circle on the top of the base, and there was the top of its spaces and its borders: and it was open at the top of its spaces.
7:22 And its borders were cherubs, and lions, and palm-trees, upright, each was joined in front and within and round about.
7:23 According to the same form he made all the ten bases, even one order and one measure to all.
7:24 And he made ten brazen lavers, each laver containing forty baths, and measuring four cubits, each laver placed on a several base throughout the ten bases.
7:25 And he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of the house: and the sea was placed on the right side of the house eastward in the direction of the south.
7:26 And Chiram made the caldrons, and the pans, and the bowls; and Chiram finished making all the works that he wrought for king Solomon in the house of the Lord:
7:27 two pillars and the wreathen works of the pillars on the heads of the two pillars; and the two net-works to cover both the wreathen works of the flutings that were upon the pillars.
7:28 The four hundred pomegranates for both the net-works, two rows of pomegranates for one net-work, to cover both the wreathen works of the bases belonging to both pillars.
7:29 And the ten bases, and the ten lavers upon the bases.
7:30 And one sea, and the twelve oxen under the sea.
7:31 And the caldrons, and pans, and bowls, and all the furniture, which Chiram made for king Solomon for the house of the Lord: and there were eight and forty pillars of the house of the king and of the house of the Lord: all the works of the king which Chiram made were entirely of brass.
7:32 There was no reckoning of the brass of which he made all these works, from the very great abundance, there was no end of the weight of the brass.
7:33 In the country round about Jordan did he cast them, in the clay land between Socchoth and Sira.
7:34 And king Solomon took the furniture which Chiram made for the house of the Lord, the golden altar, and the golden table of shewbread.
7:35 And he put the five candlesticks on the left, and five on the right in front of the oracle, being of pure gold, and the lamp-stands, and the lamps, and the snuffers of gold.
7:36 And there were made the porches, and the nails, and the bowls, and the spoons, and the golden censers, of pure gold: and the panels of the doors of the innermost part of the house, even the holy of holies, and the golden doors of the temple.
7:37 So the work of the house of the Lord which Solomon wrought was finished; and Solomon brought in the holy things of David his father, and all the holy things of Solomon; he put the silver, and the gold, and the furniture, into the treasures of the house of the Lord.
7:38 And Solomon built a house for himself in thirteen years.
7:39 And he built the house with the wood of Libanus; its length was a hundred cubits, and its breadth was fifty cubits, and its height was of thirty cubits, and it was made with three rows of cedar pillars, and the pillars had side-pieces of cedar.
7:40 And he formed the house with chambers above on the sides of the pillars, and the number of the pillars was each row forty and five,
7:41 and there were three chambers, and space against space in three rows.
7:42 And all the doors and spaces formed like chambers were square, and from door to door was a correspondence in three rows.
7:43 And he made the porch of the pillars, they were fifty cubits long and fifty broad, the porch joining them in front; and the other pillars and the thick beam were in front of the house by the porches.
7:44 And there was the Porch of seats where he would judge, the porch of judgment.
7:45 And their house where he would dwell, had one court communicating with these according to this work; and he built the house for the daughter of Pharao whom Solomon had taken, according to this porch.
7:46 All these were of costly stones, sculptured at intervals within even from the foundation even to the top, and outward to the great court,
7:47 founded with large costly stones, stones of ten cubits and eight cubits long.
7:48 And above with costly stones, according to the measure of hewn stones, and with cedars.
7:49 There were three rows of hewn stones round about the great hall, and a row of sculptured cedar:
7:50 and Solomon finished all his house.
