9:1 For the end, a Psalm of David, concerning the secrets of the Son.
9:2 I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will recount all thy wonderful works.
9:3 I will be glad and exult in thee: I will sing to thy name, O thou Most High.
9:4 When mine enemies are turned back, they shall be feeble and perish at thy presence.
9:5 For thou hast maintained my cause and my right; thou satest on the throne, that judgest righteousness.
9:6 Thou hast rebuked the nations, and the ungodly one has perished; thou hast blotted out their name for ever, even for ever and ever.
9:7 The swords of the enemy have failed utterly; and thou hast destroyed cities: their memorial has been destroyed with a noise,
9:8 but the Lord endures for ever: he has prepared his throne for judgment.
9:9 And he will judge the world in righteousness, he will judge the nations in uprightness.
9:10 The Lord also is become a refuge for the poor, a seasonable help, in affliction.
9:11 And let them that know thy name hope in thee: for thou, O Lord, hast not failed them that diligently seek thee.
9:12 Sing praises to the Lord, who dwells in Sion: declare his dealings among the nations.
9:13 For he remembered them, in making inquisition for blood: he has not forgotten the supplication of the poor.
9:14 Have mercy upon me, O Lord; look upon my affliction which I suffer of mine enemies, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:
9:15 that I may declare all thy praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion: I will exult in thy salvation.
9:16 The heathen are caught in the destruction which they planned: in the very snare which they hid is their foot taken.
9:17 The Lord is known as executing judgments: the sinner is taken in the works of his hands. A song of Pause.
9:18 Let sinners be driven away into Hades, even all the nations that forget God.
9:19 For the poor shall not be forgotten for ever: the patience of the needy ones shall not perish for ever.
9:20 Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged before thee.
9:21 Appoint, O Lord, a lawgiver over them: let the heathen know that they are men. Pause.
9:22 Why standest thou afar off, O Lord? why dost thou overlook us in times of need, in affliction?
9:23 While the ungodly one acts proudly, the poor is hotly pursued: the wicked are taken in the crafty counsels which they imagine.
9:24 Because the sinner praises himself for the desires of his heart; and the unjust one blesses himself.
9:25 The sinner has provoked the Lord: according to the abundance of his pride he will not seek after him: God is not before him.
9:26 His ways are profane at all times; thy judgments are removed from before him: he will gain the mastery over all his enemies.
9:27 For he has said in his heart, I shall not be moved, continuing without evil from generation to generation.
9:28 Whose mouth is full of cursing, and bitterness, and fraud: under his tongue are trouble and pain.
9:29 He lies in wait with rich men in secret places, in order to slay the innocent: his eyes are set against the poor.
9:30 He lies in wait in secret as a lion in his den: he lies in wait to ravish the poor, to ravish the poor when he draws him after him: he will bring him down in his snare.
9:31 He will bow down and fall when he has mastered the poor.
9:32 For he has said in his heart, God has forgotten: he has turned away his face so as never to look.
9:33 Arise, O Lord God; let thy hand be lifted up: forget not the poor.
9:34 Wherefore has the wicked provoked God? for he has said in his heart, He will not require it.
9:35 Thou seest it; for thou dost observe trouble and wrath, to deliver them into thy hands: the poor has been left to thee; thou wast a helper to the orphan.
9:36 Break thou the arm of the sinner and wicked man: his sin shall be sought for, and shall not be found.
9:37 The Lord shall reign for ever, even for ever and ever: ye Gentiles shall perish out of his land.
9:38 The Lord has heard the desire of the poor: thine ear has inclined to the preparation of their heart;
9:39 to plead for the orphan and afflicted, that man may no more boast upon the earth.
