1:1 Now
1:2 Thus said Cyrus king of the Persians, The Lord God of heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has given me a charge to build him a house in Jerusalem that is in Judea.
1:3 Who
1:4 And
1:5 Then the chiefs of the families of Juda and Benjamin arose, and the priests, and the Levites, all whose spirit the Lord stirred up to go up to build the house of the Lord that
1:6 And all that were round about strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with cattle, and with presents, besides the voluntary offerings.
1:7 And king Cyrus brought out the vessels of the house of the Lord, which Nabuchodonosor had brought from Jerusalem, and put in the house of his god.
1:8 And Cyrus king of the Persians brought them out by the hand of Mithradates the treasurer, and he numbered them to Sasabasar, the chief man of Juda.
1:9 And this
1:10 and four hundred
1:11 All the gold and silver vessels were five thousand four hundred,
2:1 And these
2:2 who came with Zorobabel: Jesus, Neemias, Saraias, Reelias, Mardochæus, Balasan, Masphar, Baguai, Reum, Baana. The number of the people of Israel:
2:3 The children of Phares, two thousand one hundred and seventy-two.
2:4 The children of Saphatia, three hundred and seventy-two.
2:5 The children of Ares, seven hundred and seventy-five.
2:6 The children of Phaath Moab, belonging to the sons of Jesue
2:7 The children of Ælam, a thousand two hundred and fifty-four.
2:8 The children of Zatthua, nine hundred and forty-five.
2:9 The children of Zacchu, seven hundred and sixty.
2:10 The children of Banui, six hundred and forty-two.
2:11 The children of Babai, six hundred and twenty-three.
2:12 The children of Asgad, a thousand two hundred and twenty-two.
2:13 The children of Adonicam, six hundred and sixty-six.
2:14 The children of Bague, two thousand and fifty-six.
2:15 The children of Addin, four hundred and fifty-four.
2:16 The children of Ater
2:17 The children of Bassu, three hundred and twenty-three.
2:18 The children of Jora, a hundred and twelve.
2:19 The children of Asum, two hundred and twenty-three.
2:20 The children of Gaber, ninety-five.
2:21 The children of Bethlaem, a hundred and twenty-three.
2:22 The children of Netopha, fifty-six.
2:23 The children of Anathoth, a hundred and twenty-eight.
2:24 The children of Azmoth, forty-three.
2:25 The children of Cariathiarim, Chaphira, and Beroth, seven hundred and forty-three.
2:26 The children of Rama and Gabaa, six hundred and twenty-one.
2:27 The men of Machmas, a hundred and twenty-two.
2:28 The men of Bæthel and Aia, four hundred and twenty-three.
2:29 The children of Nabu, fifty-two.
2:30 The children of Magebis, a hundred and fifty-six.
2:31 The children of Elamar, a thousand two hundred and fifty-four.
2:32 The children of Elam, three hundred and twenty.
2:33 The children of Lodadi and Ono, seven hundred and twenty-five.
2:34 The children of Jericho, three hundred and forty-five.
2:35 The children of Senaa, three thousand six hundred and thirty.
2:36 And the priests, the sons of Jedua,
2:37 The children of Emmer, a thousand
2:38 The children of Phassur, a thousand two hundred
2:39 The children of Erem, a thousand
2:40 And the Levites, the sons of Jesus and Cadmiel, belonging to the sons of Oduia, seventy-four.
2:41 The sons of Asaph, singers, a hundred
2:42 The children of the porters, the children of Sellum, the children of Ater, the children of Telmon, the children of Acub, the children of Atita, the children of Sobai,
2:43 The Nathinim: the children of Suthia, the children of Asupha, the children of Tabaoth,
2:44 the sons of Cades, the children of Siaa, the children of Phadon,
2:45 the children of Labano, the children of Agaba, the sons of Acub,
2:46 the children of Agab, the children of Selami, the children of Anan,
2:47 the children of Geddel, the children of Gaar, the children of Raia,
2:48 the children of Rason, the children of Necoda, the children of Gazem,
2:49 the children of Azo, the children of Phase, the children of Basi,
2:50 the children of Asena, the children of Moünim, the children of Nephusim,
2:51 the children of Bacbuc, the children of Acupha, the children of Arur,
2:52 the children of Basaloth, the children of Mauda, the children of Arsa,
2:53 the children of Barcos, the children of Sisara, the children of Thema,
2:54 the children of Nasthie, the children of Atupha.
2:55 The children of the servants of Solomon: the children of Sotai, the children of Sephera, the children of Phadura,
2:56 the children of Jeela, the children of Darcon, the children of Gedel,
2:57 the children of Saphatia, the children of Atil, the children of Phacherath, the children of Aseboim, the children of Emei.
2:58 All the Nathanim, and the sons of Abdeselma
2:59 And these
2:60 the children of Dalæa, the children of Bua, the children of Tobias, the children of Necoda, six hundred
2:61 And of the children of the priests, the children of Labeia, the children of Akkus, the children of Berzellai, who took a wife of the daughter of Berzellai the Galaadite, and was called by their name.
2:62 These sought their genealogy
2:63 And the Athersastha told them that they should not eat of the most holy things, until a priest should arise with Lights and Perfections.
2:64 And all the congregation together
2:65 besides their men-servants and maid-servants,
2:66 Their horses
2:67 Their camels, four hundred
2:68 And
2:69 According to their power they gave into the treasury of the work pure gold sixty-one thousand pieces, and five thousand pounds of silver, and one hundred priests' garments.
2:70 So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nathinim, dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.
3:1 And the seventh month came on, and the children of Israel
3:2 Then stood up Jesus the
3:3 And they set up the altar on its place, for there was a terror upon them because of the people of the lands: and the whole-burnt-offering was offered up upon it to the Lord morning and evening.
3:4 And they kept the feast of tabernacles, according to that which was written, and
3:5 And after this the perpetual whole-burnt-offering, and
3:6 On the first day of the seventh month they began to offer whole-burnt-offerings to the Lord: but the foundation of the house of the Lord was not laid.
3:7 And they gave money to the stone-hewers and carpenters, and meat and drink, and oil, to the Sidonians, and Tyrians, to bring cedar trees from Libanus to the sea of Joppa, according to the grant of Cyrus king of the Persians to them.
3:8 And in the second year of their coming to the house of God in Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zorobabel the
3:9 And Jesus and his sons and his brethren stood, Cadmiel and his sons the sons of Juda, over them that wrought the works in the house of God: the sons of Enadad, their sons and their brethren the Levites.
3:10 And they laid a foundation for building the house of the Lord: and the priests in their robes stood with trumpets and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the Lord, according to the order of David king of Israel.
3:11 And they answered
3:12 But many of the priests and the Levites, and the elder men, heads of families, who had seen the former house on its foundation, and
3:13 And the people did not distinguish the voice of the glad shout from the voice of the weeping of the people: for the people shouted with a loud voice, and the voice was heard even from afar off.
4:1 And they that afflicted Juda and Benjamin heard, that the children of the captivity were building a house to the Lord God of Israel.
4:2 And they drew near to Zorobabel, and to the heads of families, and said to them, We will build with you; for as ye
4:3 Then Zorobabel, and Jesus and the rest of the heads of the families of Israel said to them,
4:4 And the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Juda, and hindered them in building,
4:5 and
4:6 And in the reign of Assuerus, even in the beginning of his reign, they wrote a letter against the inhabitants of Juda and Jerusalem.
4:7 And in the days of Arthasastha, Tabeel wrote peaceably to Mithradates and to the rest of his fellow-servants: the tribute-gatherer wrote to Arthasastha king of the Persians a writing in the Syrian tongue, and
4:8 Reum the chancellor, and Sampsa the scribe wrote an epistle against Jerusalem to king Arthasastha,
4:9 Thus has judged Reum the chancellor, and Sampsa the scribe, and the rest of our fellow-servants, the Dinæans, the Apharsathachæans, the Tarphalæans, the Apharsæans, the Archyæans, the Babylonians, the Susanachæans, Davæans,
4:10 and the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Assenaphar removed, and settled them in the cities of Somoron, and the rest
4:11 This
4:12 Be it known to the king, that the Jews who came up from thee to us have come to Jerusalem the rebellious and wicked city, which they are building, and its walls are set in order, and they have established the foundations of it.
4:13 Now then be it known to the king, that if that city be built up, and its walls completed, thou shalt have no tribute, neither will they pay
4:14 And it is not lawful for us to see the dishonour of the king: therefore have we sent and made known
4:15 that examination may be made in thy fathers' book of record; and thou shalt find, and thou shalt know that that city
4:16 We therefore declare to the king, that, if that city be built, and its walls be set up, thou shalt not have peace.
4:17 Then the king sent to Reum the chancellor, and Sampsa the scribe, and the rest of their fellow-servants who dwelt in Samaria, and the rest beyond the river,
4:18 The tribute-gatherer whom ye sent to us, has been called before me.
4:19 And a decree has been made by me, and we have examined, and found that that city of old time exalts itself against kings, and that rebellions and desertions take place within it.
4:20 And there were powerful kings in Jerusalem, and they ruled over all the
4:21 Now therefore make a decree to stop the work of those men, and that city shall no more be built.
4:22 See
4:23 Then the tribute-gatherer of king Arthasastha read
4:24 Then ceased the work of the house of God in Jerusalem, and it was at a stand until the second year of the reign of Darius king of the Persians.
5:1 And Aggæus the prophet, and Zacharias the
5:2 Then rose up Zorobabel the
5:3 At the same time came there upon them Thanthanai, the governor on this side the river, and Satharbuzanai, and their fellow-servants, and spoke thus to them, Who has ordained a decree for you to build this house, and to
5:4 Then they spoke thus to them, What are the names of the men that build this city?
5:5 But the eyes of God were upon the captivity of Juda, and they did not cause them to cease till the decree was brought to Darius; and then was sent by the tribute-gatherer concerning this
5:6 the copy of a letter, which Thanthanai, the governor of the part on this side the river, and Satharbuzanai, and their fellow-servants the Apharsachæans who were on this side of the river, sent to king Darius.
5:7 They sent an account to him, and thus it was written in it:
5:8 Be it known to the king, that we went into the land of Judea, to the house of the great God; and it is building with choice stones, and they are laying timbers in the walls, and that work is prospering, and goes on favourably in their hands.
5:9 Then we asked those elders, and thus we said to them, Who gave you the order to build this house, and to
5:10 And we asked them their names,
5:11 And they answered us thus, saying, We
5:12 But after that our fathers provoked the God of heaven, he gave them into the hands of Nabuchodonosor the Chaldean, king of Babylon, and he destroyed this house, and carried the people captive to Babylon.
5:13 And in the first year of king Cyrus, Cyrus the king made a decree that this house of God should be built.
5:14 And the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nabuchodonosor brought out from the house that was in Jerusalem, and carried them into the temple of the king, them did king Cyrus bring out from the temple of the king, and gave them to Sabanasar the treasurer, who was over the treasure;
5:15 and said to him, Take all the vessels, and go, put them in the house that is in Jerusalem in their place.
5:16 Then that Sabanazar came, and laid the foundations of the house of God in Jerusalem: and from that time even until now it has been building, and has not been finished.
5:17 And now, if it
6:1 Then Darius the king made a decree, and caused a search to be made in the record-offices, where the treasure is stored in Babylon.
6:2 And there was found in the city, in the palace, a volume, and this was the record written in it.
6:3 In the first year of king Cyrus, Cyrus the king made a decree concerning the holy house of God that was in Jerusalem,
6:4 And
6:5 And the silver and the gold vessels of the house of God, which Nabuchodonosor carried off from the house that was in Jerusalem, and carried to Babylon, let them even be given, and be carried to the temple that is in Jerusalem, and put in the place where they were set in the house of God.
6:6 Now, ye rulers beyond the river, Satharbuzanai, and their fellow-servants the Apharsachæans, who
6:7 Now let alone the work of the house of God: let the rulers of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build that house of God on its place.
6:8 Also a decree has been made by me, if haply ye may do somewhat in concert with the elders of the Jews for the building of that house of God: to wit, out of the king's property,
6:9 And whatever need
6:10 that they may offer sweet savours to the God of heaven, and that they may pray for the life of the king and his sons.
6:11 And a decree has been made by me, that every man who shall alter this word, timber shall be pulled down from his house, and let him be lifted up and slain upon it, and his house shall be confiscated.
6:12 And may the God whose name dwells there, overthrow every king and people who shall stretch out his hand to alter or destroy the house of God which is in Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree; let it be diligently
6:13 Then Thanthanai the governor on this side beyond the river, Satharbuzanai, and his fellow-servants, according to that which king Darius sent, so they did diligently.
6:14 And the elders of the Jews and the Levites built, at the prophecy of Aggæus the prophet, and Zacharias the son of Addo: and they built up, and finished
6:15 And they finished this house by the third day of the month Adar, which is the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king.
6:16 And the children of Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of the house of God with gladness.
6:17 And they offered for the dedication of the house of God a hundred calves, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, twelve kids of the goats for a sin-offering for all Israel, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.
6:18 And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their separate orders, for the services of God in Jerusalem, according to the writing of the book of Moses.
6:19 And the children of the captivity kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.
6:20 For the priests and Levites were purified, all were clean to a man, and they slew the passover for all the children of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.
6:21 And the children of Israel ate the passover,
6:22 And they kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with gladness, because the Lord made them glad, and he turned the heart of the king of Assyria to them, to strengthen their hands in the works of the house of the God of Israel.
7:1 Now after these things, in the reign of Arthasastha king of the Persians, came up Esdras the son of Saraias, the son of Azarias, the son of Chelcias,
7:2 the son of Selum, the son of Sadduc, the son of Achitob,
7:3 the son of Samarias, the son of Esria, the son of Mareoth,
7:4 the son of Zaraia, the son of Ozias, the son of Bokki,
7:5 the son of Abisue, the son of Phinees, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the first priest.
7:6 This Esdras went up out of Babylon; and he was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the Lord God of Israel gave: and the king gave him
7:7 And
7:8 And they came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, this
7:9 For in the first
7:10 For Esdras had determined in his heart to seek the law, and to do and teach the ordinances and judgments in Israel.
7:11 And this
7:12 Arthasastha, king of kings, to Esdras, the scribe of the law of the Lord God of heaven, Let the order and the answer be accomplished.
7:13 A decree is made by me, that every one who is willing in my kingdom of the people of Israel, and of the priests and Levites, to go to Jerusalem,
7:14 One
7:15 And for the house of the Lord
7:16 And all the silver and gold, whatsoever thou shalt find in all the land of Babylon, with the freewill-offering of the people, and the priests that offer freely for the house of God which is in Jerusalem.
7:17 And as for every one that arrives
7:18 And whatever it shall seem good to thee and to thy brethren to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, do as it is pleasing to your God.
7:19 And deliver the vessels that are given thee for the service of the house of God, before God in Jerusalem.
7:20 And as to the rest of the need of the house of thy God, thou shalt give from the king's treasure-houses,
7:21 and from me, whatever it shall seem
7:22 to
7:23 Let whatever is in the decree of the God of heaven, be done: take heed lest any one make an attack on the house of the God of heaven, lest at any time there should be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons.
7:24 Also this has been declared to you, with respect to all the priests, and Levites, the singers, porters, Nathinim and ministers of the house of God, let no tribute be
7:25 And thou, Esdras, as the wisdom of God
7:26 And whosoever shall not do the law of God, and the law of the king readily, judgment shall be taken upon him, whether for death or for chastisement, or for a fine of his property, or casting into prison.
7:27 Blessed
7:28 and has given me favour in the eyes of the king, and of his councillors, and all the rulers of the king, the exalted ones. And I was strengthened according to the good hand of God upon me, and I gathered chief men of Israel to go up with me.
8:1 And these
8:2 Of the sons of Phinees; Gerson: of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel: of the sons of David; Attus.
8:3 Of the sons of Sachania, and of the sons of Phoros; Zacharias: and with him a company
8:4 Of the sons of Phaath-Moab; Eliana the son of Saraia, and with him two hundred that were males.
8:5 And of the sons of Zathoes; Sechenias the son of Aziel, and with him three hundred males.
8:6 And of the sons of Adin; Obeth the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty males.
8:7 And of the sons of Elam; Isæas the son of Athelia, and with him seventy males.
8:8 And of the sons of Saphatia; Zabadias the son of Michael, and with him eighty males.
8:9 And of the sons of Joab; Abadia the son of Jeiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen males.
8:10 And of the sons of Baani; Selimuth the son of Josephia, and with him a hundred and sixty males.
8:11 And of the sons of Babi; Zacharias the son of Babi, and with him twenty-eight males.
8:12 And of the sons of Asgad; Joanan the son of Accatan, and with him a hundred and ten males.
8:13 And of the sons of Adonicam
8:14 And of the sons of Baguæ, Uthai, and Zabud, and with him seventy males.
8:15 And I gathered them to the river that comes to Evi, and we encamped there three days: and I reviewed the people and the priests, and found none of the sons of Levi there.
8:16 And I sent men of understanding to Eleazar, to Ariel, to Semeias, and to Alonam, and to Jarib, and to Elnatham, and to Nathan, and to Zacharias, and to Mesollam, and to Joarim, and to Elnathan.
8:17 And I forwarded them to the rulers with the money of the place, and I put words in their mouth to speak to their brethren the Athinim with the money of the place, that they should bring us singers for the house of our God.
8:18 And they came to us, as the good hand of our God was upon us, even a man of understanding of the sons of Mooli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel, and at the commencement came his sons and his brethren, eighteen.
8:19 And Asebia, and Isaia of the sons of Merari, his brethren and his sons, twenty.
8:20 And of the Nathinim, whom David and the princes had appointed for the service of the Levites
8:21 And I proclaimed there a fast, at the river Aüe, that
8:22 For I was ashamed to ask of the king a guard and horsemen to save us from the enemy in the way: for we had spoken to the king, saying, The hand of our God
8:23 So we fasted, and asked of our God concerning this; and he hearkened to us.
8:24 And I gave charge to twelve of the chiefs of the priests, to Saraia, to Asabia, and ten of their brethren with them.
8:25 And I weighed to them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of the first-fruits of the house of our God, which the king, and his councillors, and his princes, and all Israel that were found, had dedicated.
8:26 I even weighed into their hands six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and a hundred silver vessels, and a hundred talents of gold;
8:27 and twenty golden bowls,
8:28 And I said to them, Ye
8:29 Be watchful and keep them, until ye weigh
8:30 So the priests and the Levites took the weight of the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, to bring to Jerusalem into the house of our God.
8:31 And we departed from the river of Aüe on the twelfth day of the first month, to come to Jerusalem: and the hand of our God was upon us, and delivered us from the hand of the enemy and adversary in the way.
8:32 And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days.
8:33 And it came to pass on the fourth day that we weighed the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, in the house of our God, into the hand of Merimoth the son of Uria the priest; and with him
8:34 All things
8:35 At that time the children of the banishment that came from the captivity offered whole-burnt-offerings to the God of Israel, twelve calves for all Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs, twelve goats for a sin-offering: all whole-burnt-offerings to the Lord.
8:36 And they gave the king's mandate to the king's lieutenants, and the governors beyond the river: and they honoured the people and the house of God.
9:1 And when these things were finished, the princes drew near to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the people of the lands in their abominations,
9:2 For they have taken of their daughters for themselves and their sons; and the holy seed has passed among the nations of the lands, and the hand of the rulers
9:3 And when I heard this thing, I rent my garments, and trembled, and plucked
9:4 Then there assembled to me all that followed the word of the God of Israel, on account of the transgression of the captivity; and I remained mourning until the evening sacrifice.
9:5 And at the evening sacrifice I rose up from my humiliation; and when I had rent my garments, then I trembled, and I bow myself on my knees, and spread out my hands to the Lord God,
9:6 and I said, O Lord, I am ashamed and confounded, O my God, to lift up my face to thee: for our transgressions have abounded over our head, and our trespasses have increased even to heaven.
9:7 From the days of our fathers we have been in a great trespass until this day: and because of our iniquities we, and our kings, and our children, have been delivered into the hand of the kings of the Gentiles by the sword, and by captivity, and by spoil, and with shame of our face, as at this day.
9:8 And now our God has dealt mercifully with us, so as to leave us to escape, and to give us an establishment in the place of his sanctuary, to enlighten our eyes, and to give a little quickening in our servitude.
9:9 For we are slaves, yet in our servitude the Lord our God has not deserted us; and he has extended favour to us in the sight of the kings of the Persians, to give us a quickening, that they should raise up the house of our God, and restore the desolate places of it, and to give us a fence in Juda and Jerusalem.
9:10 What shall we say, our God, after this? for we have forsaken thy commandments,
9:11 which thou hast given us by the hand of thy servants the prophets, saying, The land, into which ye go to inherit it, is a land subject to disturbance by the removal of the people of the nations for their abominations, wherewith they have filled it from one end to the other by their uncleannesses.
9:12 And now give not your daughters to their sons, and take not of their daughters for your sons, neither shall ye seek their peace or their good for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land, and transmit it as an inheritance to your children for ever.
9:13 And after all that is come upon us because of our evil deeds, and our great trespass,
9:14 whereas we have repeatedly broken thy commandments, and intermarried with the people of the lands: be not very angry with us to
9:15 O Lord God of Israel, thou
10:1 So when Esdras
10:2 And Sechenias the son of Jeel, of the sons of Elam, answered and said to Esdras, We have broken covenant with our God, and have taken strange wives of the nations of the land: yet now there is patience
10:3 Now then let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the wives, and their offspring, as thou shalt advise:
10:4 arise, and alarm them with the commands of our God; and let
10:5 Then Esdras arose, and caused the rulers, the priests, and Levites, and all Israel, to swear that they would do according to this word: and they swore.
10:6 And Esdras rose up from before the house of God, and went to the treasury of Joanan the son of Elisub; he even went thither: he ate no bread, and drank no water; for he mourned over the unfaithfulness
10:7 And they made proclamation throughout Juda and Jerusalem to all the children of the captivity, that they should assemble at Jerusalem,
10:8 Every one who shall not arrive within three days, as
10:9 So all the men of Juda and Benjamin assembled at Jerusalem within the three days. This
10:10 And Esdras the priest arose, and said to them, Ye have broken covenant, and have taken strange wives, to add to the trespass of Israel.
10:11 Now therefore give praise to the Lord God of our fathers, and do that which is pleasing in his sight: and separate yourselves from the peoples of the land, and from the strange wives.
10:12 Then all the congregation answered and said, This thy word
10:13 But the people
10:14 Let now our rulers stand, and for all those in our cities who have taken strange wives, let them come at appointed times, and with them elders from every several city, and judges, to turn away the fierce wrath of our God from us concerning this matter.
10:15 Only Jonathan the son of Asael, and Jazias the son of Thecoe
10:16 And the children of the captivity did thus: and Esdras the priest, and heads of families according to
10:17 And they made an end with all the men who had taken strange wives by the first day of the first month.
10:18 And there were found
10:19 And they pledged themselves to put away their wives, and
10:20 And of the sons of Emmer; Anani, and Zabdia.
10:21 And of the sons of Eram; Masael, and Elia, and Samaia, and Jeel, and Ozia.
10:22 And of the sons of Phasur; Elionai, Maasia, and Ismael, and Nathanael, and Jozabad, and Elasa.
10:23 And of the Levites; Jozabad, and Samu, and Colia (he
10:24 And of the singers; Elisab: and of the porters; Solmen, and Telmen, and Oduth.
10:25 Also of Israel: of the sons of Phoros; Ramia, and Azia, and Melchia, and Meamin, and Eleazar, and Asabia, and Banaia.
10:26 And of the sons of Helam; Matthania, and Zacharia, and Jaïel, and Abdia, and Jarimoth, and Elia.
10:27 And of the sons of Zathua; Elionai, Elisub, Matthanai, and Armoth, and Zabad, and Oziza.
10:28 And of the sons of Babei; Joanan, Anania, and Zabu, and Thali.
10:29 And of the sons of Banui; Mosollam, Maluch, Adaias, Jasub, and Saluia, and Remoth.
10:30 And of the sons of Phaath Moab; Edne, and Chalel, and Banaia, Maasia, Matthania, Beseleel, and Banui, and Manasse.
10:31 And of the sons of Eram; Eliezer, Jesia, Melchia, Samaias, Semeon,
10:32 Benjamin, Baluch, Samaria.
10:33 And of the sons of Asem; Metthania, Matthatha, Zadab, Eliphalet, Jerami, Manasse, Semei.
10:34 And of the sons of Bani; Moodia, Amram, Uel,
10:35 Banaia, Badaia, Chelkia,
10:36 Uvania, Marimoth, Eliasiph,
10:37 Matthania, Matthanai:
10:38 and
10:39 and Selemia, and Nathan, and Adaia,
10:40 Machadnabu, Sesei, Sariu,
10:41 Ezriel, and Selemia, and Samaria,
10:42 and Sellum, Amaria, Joseph.
10:43 Of the sons of Nabu; Jael, Matthanias, Zabad, Zebennas, Jadai, and Joel, and Banaia.
10:44 All these had taken strange wives, and had begotten sons of them.
11:1 The
11:2 And Anani, one of my brethren, came, he and
11:3 And they said to me, The remnant,
11:4 And it came to pass, when I heard these words,
11:5 And I said, Nay, I pray thee, O Lord God of heaven, the mighty, the great and terrible, keeping thy covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to those that keep his commandments:
11:6 let now thine ear be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee at this time, this day
11:7 We have altogether broken
11:8 Remember, I pray thee, the word wherewith thou didst charge thy servant Moses, saying, If ye break covenant
11:9 But if ye turn again to me, and keep my commandments, and do them; if ye should be scattered under the utmost
11:10 Now they
11:11 Turn
12:1 And it came to pass in the month Nisan of the twentieth year of king Arthasastha, that the wine was before me: and I took the wine, and gave
12:2 And the king said to me, Why is thy countenance sad, and dost thou not control thyself? and now this is nothing but sorrow of heart. Then I was very much alarmed,
12:3 and I said to the king, Let the king live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, forasmuch as the city, even the home of the sepulchres of my fathers, has been laid waste, and her gates have been devoured with fire?
12:4 And the king said to me, For what dost thou ask thus? So I prayed to the God of heaven.
12:5 And I said to the king, If
12:6 And the king, and his concubine that sat next to him, said to me, For how long will thy journey be, and when wilt thou return? and
12:7 And I said to the king, If
12:8 and a letter to Asaph the keeper of the garden which belongs to the king, that he may give me timber to cover the gates, and for the wall of the city, and for the house into which I shall enter. And the king gave to me, according as the good hand of God
12:9 And I came to the governors beyond the river, and I gave them the king's letters. (Now the king had sent with me captains of the army and horsemen.)
12:10 And Sanaballat the Aronite heard
12:11 So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.
12:12 And I rose up by night, I and a few men with me; and I told no man what God put into my heart to do with Israel; and there was no beast with me, except the beast which I rode upon.
12:13 And I went forth by the gate of the valley by night, and to the mouth of the well of fig trees, and to the dung-gate: and I mourned over the wall of Jerusalem which they were destroying, and her gates were devoured with fire.
12:14 And I passed on to the fountain gate, and to the king's pool; and there was no room for the beast to pass under me.
12:15 And I went up by the wall of the brook by night, and mourned over the wall, and passed through the gate of the valley, and returned.
12:16 And the sentinels knew not why I went, nor what I was doing; and until that time I told
12:17 Then I said to them, Ye see this evil, in which we are, how Jerusalem is desolate, and her gates have been set on fire: come, and let us build throughout the wall of Jerusalem, and we shall be no longer a reproach.
12:18 And I told them of the hand of God which was good upon me, also about the words of the king which he spoke to me: and I said, Let us arise and build. And their hands were strengthened for the good
12:19 And Sanaballat the Aronite, and Tobia the servant, the Ammonite, and Gesam the Arabian, heard
12:20 And I answered them, and said to them, The God of heaven, he shall prosper us, and we his servants are pure, and we will build: but ye have no part, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.
13:1 Then Eliasub the high priest, and his brethren the priests, rose up, and built the sheep-gate; they sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even to the tower of the hundred they sanctified
13:2 And
13:3 And the sons of Asana built the fish-gate; they roofed it, and covered in its doors, and bolts, and bars.
13:4 And next to them
13:5 And next to them the Thecoim took
13:6 And Joida the son of Phasec, and Mesulam son of Basodia, repaired the old gate; they covered it in, and set up its doors, and its bolts, and its bars.
13:7 And next to them repaired Maltias the Gabaonite, and Evaron the Meronothite, the men of Gabaon and Maspha, to the throne of the governor on this side the river.
13:8 And next to him Oziel the son of Arachias of the smiths, carried on the repairs: and next to them Ananias the son of one of the apothecaries repaired, and they finished Jerusalem to the broad wall.
13:9 And next to them repaired Raphæa the son of Sur, the ruler of half the district round about Jerusalem.
13:10 And next to them repaired Jedaia the son of Eromaph, and
13:11 And next
13:12 And next to him repaired Sallum the son of Alloes, the ruler of half the district round about Jerusalem, he and his daughters.
13:13 Anun and the inhabitants of Zano repaired the gate of the valley: they built it, and set up its doors, and its bolts, and its bars, and a thousand cubits of the wall as far as the dung-gate.
13:14 And Melchia the son of Rechab, the ruler of the district round about Bethaccharim, repaired the dung-gate, he and his sons; and they covered it, and set up its doors, and its bolts, and its bars.
13:15 But Solomon the son of Choleze repaired the gate of the fountain, the ruler of part of Maspha; he built it, and covered it, and set up its doors and its bars, and the wall of the pool of the skins by the meadow of the king, and as far as the steps that lead down from the city of David.
13:16 After him repaired Neemias son of Azabuch, ruler of half the district round about Bethsur, as far as the garden of David's sepulchre, and as far as the artificial pool, and as far as the house of the mighty men.
13:17 After him repaired the Levites,
13:18 And after him repaired his brethren, Benei son of Enadad, ruler of half the district round about Keila.
13:19 And next to him repaired Azur the son of Joshua, ruler of Masphai, another portion of the tower of ascent, where it meets the corner.
13:20 After him repaired Baruch the son of Zabu, a second portion, from the corner as far as the door of the house of Eliasub the high priest.
13:21 After him repaired Meramoth the son of Uria the son of Accos, a second part from the door of the house of Eliasub to the end of the house of Eliasub.
13:22 And after him repaired the priests, the men of Ecchechar.
13:23 And after him repaired Benjamin and Asub over against their house: and after him repaired Azarias son of Maasias the son of Ananias,
13:24 After him repaired Bani the son of Adad, another portion from the house of Azaria as far as the corner and to the turning,
13:25 of Phalach the son of Uzai, opposite the corner, and
13:26 And the Nathinim dwelt in Ophal, as far as the garden of the water-gate eastward, and
13:27 And after them the Thecoim repaired, another portion opposite the great projecting tower, even as far as the wall of Ophla.
13:28 The priests repaired above the horse-gate,
13:29 And after him Sadduc the son of Emmer repaired opposite his own house: and after him repaired Samæa son of Sechenia, guard of the east-gate.
13:30 After him repaired Anania son of Selemia, and Anom, the sixth son of Seleph, another portion: after him Mesulam the son of Barachia repaired over against his treasury.
13:31 After him repaired Melchia the son of Sarephi as far as the house of the Nathinim, and the chapmen over against the gate of Maphecad, and as far as the steps of the corner.
13:32 And between
13:33 Now it came to pass, when Sanaballat heard that we were building the wall, that it was grievous to him, and he was very angry, and railed against the Jews.
13:34 And he said before his brethren (that
13:35 And Tobias the Ammanite came near to him, and said to them, Do they sacrifice or eat in their place? shall not a fox go up and pull down their wall of stones?
13:36 Hear, O our God, for we have become a scorn; and return thou their reproach upon their head, and make them a scorn in a land of captivity,
13:37 and do not cover
14:1 But it came to pass, when Sanaballat and Tobia, and the Arabians, and the Ammanites, heard that the building of the walls of Jerusalem was advancing,
14:2 And all of them assembled together, to come to fight against Jerusalem, and to destroy it utterly.
14:3 So we prayed to our God and set watchmen against them day and night, because of them.
14:4 And Juda said, The strength of the enemies is broken, yet
14:5 And they that afflicted us said, They shall not know, and they shall not see, until we come into the midst of them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.
14:6 And it came to pass, when the Jews who lived near them came, that they said to us, They are coming up against us from every quarter.
14:7 So I set
14:8 And I looked, and arose, and said to the nobles, and to the captains, and to the rest of the people, Be not afraid of them: remember our great and terrible God, and fight for your brethren, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your houses.
14:9 And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was made known to us, and God had frustrated their counsel, that we all returned to the wall,
14:10 And it came to pass from that day
14:11 even of them that were building the wall:—and those who carried the burdens
14:12 And the builders
14:13 And I said to the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, The work
14:14 In whatsoever place ye shall hear the sound of the cornet, thither gather yourselves together to us; and our God shall fight for us.
14:15 So we
14:16 And at that time I said to the people, Lodge ye every man with his servant in the midst of Jerusalem, and let the night be a watch-time to you, and the day a work-time.
14:17 And I was
15:1 And the cry of the people and their wives
15:2 And some said, We
15:3 And some said,
15:4 And some said, We have borrowed money for the king's tributes:—our fields, and our vineyards, and houses
15:5 And now our flesh
15:6 And I was much grieved as I heard their cry and these words.
15:7 And my heart took counsel within me, and I contended against the nobles, and the princes, and I said to them, Should every man demand of his brother what ye demand? And I appointed against them a great assembly,
15:8 and I said to them, We of our free-will have redeemed our brethren the Jews that were sold to the Gentiles; and do ye sell your brethren? and shall they be delivered to us? And they were silent, and found no answer.
15:9 And I said, The thing which ye do
15:10 Both my brethren, and my acquaintances, and I, have lent them money and corn: let us now leave off this exaction.
15:11 Restore to them, I pray, as at this day, their fields, and their vineyards, and their olive-yards, and their houses, and bring forth to them corn and wine and oil of the money.
15:12 And they said, We will restore, and we will not exact of them; we will do thus as thou sayest. Then I called the priests, and bound them by oath to do according to this word.
15:13 And I shook out my garment, and said, So may God shake out every man who shall not keep to this word, from his house, and from his labours, he shall be even thus shaken out, as an outcast and empty. And all the congregation said, Amen, and they praised the Lord: and the people did this thing.
15:14 From the day that he charged me to be their ruler in the land of Juda, from the twentieth year even to the thirty-second year of Arthasastha, twelve years, I and my brethren ate not
15:15 But as for the former acts of extortion wherein
15:16 Also in the work of the wall I treated them not with rigour, I bought not land: and all that were gathered together
15:17 And the Jews, to
15:18 And there came
15:19 Remember me, O God, for good,
16:1 Now it came to pass, when Sanaballat, and Tobias, and Gesam the Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had built the wall, and
16:2 that Sanaballat and Gesam sent to me, saying, Come and let us meet together in the villages in the plain of Ono. But they
16:3 So I sent messengers to them, saying, I am doing a great work, and I shall not be able to come down, lest the work should cease: as soon as I shall have finished it, I will come down to you.
16:4 And they sent to me
16:5 Then Sanaballat sent his servant to me with an open letter in his hand.
16:6 And in it was written, It has been reported among the Gentiles that thou and the Jews are planning to revolt: therefore thou art building the wall, and thou wilt be a king to them.
16:7 And moreover thou hast appointed prophets to thyself, that thou mightest dwell in Jerusalem as a king over Juda: and now these words will be reported to the king. Now then, come, let us take counsel together.
16:8 And I sent to him, saying, It has not happened according to these words,
16:9 For all were trying to alarm us, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from this work, and it shall not be done. Now therefore I have strengthened my hands.
16:10 And I came into the house of Semei the son of Dalaia the son of Metabeel, and he was shut up; and he said, Let us assemble together in the house of God, in the midst of it, and let us shut the doors of it; for they are coming by night to slay thee.
16:11 And I said, Who is the man that shall enter into the house, that he may live?
16:12 And I observed, and, behold, God had not sent him, for the prophecy was a fable
16:13 and Tobias and Sanaballat had hired against me a multitude, that I might be frightened, and do this, and sin, and become to them an ill name, that they might reproach me.
16:14 Remember, O God, Tobias and Sanaballat, according to these their deeds, and the prophetess Noadia, and the rest of the prophets who tried to alarm me.
16:15 So the wall was finished on the twenty-fifth day of the
16:16 And it came to pass, when all our enemies heard
16:17 And in those days letters came to Tobias from many nobles of Juda, and those of Tobias came to them.
16:18 For many in Juda were bound to him by oath, because he was son-in-law of Sechenias the son of Herae; and Jonan his son had taken the daughter of Mesulam the son of Barachia to wife.
16:19 And they reported his words to me, and carried out my words to him: and Tobias sent letters to terrify me.
17:1 And it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,
17:2 that I gave charge to Ananias my brother, and Ananias the ruler of the palace, over Jerusalem: for he was a true man, and one that feared God beyond many.
17:3 And I said to them, The gates of Jerusalem shall not be opened till sunrise; and while they are still watching, let the doors be shut, and bolted; and set watches of them that dwell in Jerusalem,
17:4 Now the city
17:5 And God put
17:6 Now these
17:7 with Zorobabel, and Jesus, and Neemia, Azaria, and Reelma, Naemani, Mardochæus, Balsan, Maspharath, Esdra, Boguia, Inaum, Baana, Masphar, men of the people of Israel.
17:8 The children of Phoros, two thousand one hundred and seventy-two.
17:9 The children of Saphatia, three hundred and seventy-two.
17:10 The children of Era, six hundred and fifty-two.
17:11 The children of Phaath Moab, with the children of Jesus and Joab, two thousand six hundred and eighteen.
17:12 The children of Ælam, a thousand two hundred and fifty-four.
17:13 The children of Zathuia, eight hundred and forty-five.
17:14 The children of Zacchu, seven hundred and sixty.
17:15 The children of Banui, six hundred and forty-eight.
17:16 The children of Bebi, six hundred and twenty-eight.
17:17 The children of Asgad, two thousand three hundred and twenty-two.
17:18 The children of Adonicam, six hundred and sixty-seven.
17:19 The children of Bagoi, two thousand and sixty-seven.
17:20 The children of Edin, six hundred and fifty-five.
17:21 The children of Ater,
17:22 The children of Esam, three hundred and twenty-eight.
17:23 The children of Besei, three hundred and twenty-four.
17:24 The children of Ariph, a hundred and twelve: the children of Asen, two hundred and twenty-three.
17:25 The children of Gabaon, ninety-five.
17:26 The children of Bæthalem, a hundred and twenty-three: the children of Atopha, fifty-six.
17:27 The children of Anathoth, a hundred and twenty-eight.
17:28 The men of Bethasmoth, forty-two.
17:29 The men of Cariatharim, Caphira, and Beroth, seven hundred and forty-three.
17:30 The men of Arama and Gabaa, six hundred and twenty.
17:31 The men of Machemas, a hundred and twenty-two.
17:32 The men of Bæthel and Ai, a hundred and twenty-three.
17:33 The men of Nabia, a hundred and fifty-two.
17:34 The men of Elamaar, one thousand two hundred and fifty-two.
17:35 The children of Eram, three hundred and twenty.
17:36 The children of Jericho, three hundred and forty-five.
17:37 The children of Lodadid and Ono, seven hundred and twenty-one.
17:38 The children of Sanana, three thousand nine hundred and thirty.
17:39 The priests; the sons of Jodae,
17:40 The children of Emmer, one thousand and fifty-two.
17:41 The children of Phaseur, one thousand two hundred and forty-seven.
17:42 The children of Eram, a thousand and seventeen.
17:43 The Levites; the children of Jesus the son of Cadmiel, with the children of Uduia, seventy-four.
17:44 The singers; the children of Asaph, a hundred and forty-eight.
17:45 The porters; the children of Salum, the children of Ater, the children of Telmon, the children of Acub, the children of Atita, the children of Sabi, a hundred and thirty-eight.
17:46 The Nathinim; the children of Sea, the children of Aspha, the children of Tabaoth,
17:47 the children of Kiras, the children of Asuia, the children of Phadon,
17:48 the children of Labana, the children of Agaba, the children of Selmei,
17:49 the children of Anan, the children of Gadel, the children of Gaar,
17:50 the children of Raaia, the children of Rasson, the children of Necoda,
17:51 the children of Gezam, the children of Ozi, the children of Phese,
17:52 the children of Besi, the children of Meinon, the children of Nephosasi,
17:53 the children of Bacbuc, the children of Achipha, the children of Arur,
17:54 the children of Basaloth, the children of Mida, the children of Adasan,
17:55 the children of Barcue, the children of Sisarath, the children of Thema,
17:56 the children of Nisia, the children of Atipha.
17:57 The children of the servants of Solomon; the children of Sutei, the children of Sapharat, the children of Pherida,
17:58 the children of Jelel, the children of Dorcon, the children of Gadael,
17:59 the children of Saphatia, the children of Ettel, the children of Phacarath, the children of Sabaim, the children of Emim.
17:60 All the Nathinim, and children of the servants of Solomon,
17:61 And these went up from Thelmeleth, Thelaresa, Charub, Eron, Jemer: but they could not declare the houses of their families, or their seed, whether they were of Israel.
17:62 The children of Dalaia, the children of Tobia, the children of Necoda, six hundred and forty-two.
17:63 And of the priests; the children of Ebia, the children of Acos, the children of Berzelli, for they took wives of the daughters of Berzelli the Galaadite, and they were called by their name.
17:64 These sought the pedigree of their company, and it was not found, and they were removed
17:65 And the Athersastha said, that they should not eat of the most holy things, until a priest should stand up to give light.
17:66 And all the congregation was about forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty,
17:67 besides their men-servants and their maid-servants: these were seven thousand three hundred and thirty-seven: and the singing-men and singing-women, two hundred and forty-five.
17:69 Two thousand seven hundred asses.
17:70 And part of the heads of families gave into the treasury to Neemias for the work a thousand pieces of gold, fifty bowls, and thirty priests'
17:71 And
17:72 And the rest of the people gave twenty thousand pieces of gold, and two thousand two hundred pounds of silver, and sixty-seven priests'
17:73 And the priests, and Levites, and porters, and singers, and
18:1 And the seventh month arrived, and the children of Israel
18:2 So Esdras the priest brought the law before the congregation both of men and women, and every one who had understanding
18:3 And he read in it from the time of sun-rise to the middle of the day, before the men and the women; and they understood
18:4 And Esdras the scribe stood on a wooden stage, and there stood next to him Mattathias, and Samæas, and Ananias, and Urias, and Chelcia, and Maasia, on his right hand; and on his left Phadæas, and Misael, and Melchias, and Asom, and Asabadma, and Zacharias, and Mesollam.
18:5 And Esdras opened the book before all the people, for he was above the people; and it came to pass when he had opened it,
18:6 And Esdras blessed the Lord, the great God: and all the people answered, and said, Amen, lifting up their hands: and they bowed down and worshipped the Lord with their face to the ground.
18:7 And Jesus and Banaias and Sarabias instructed the people in the law, and the people
18:8 And they read in the book of the law of God, and Esdras taught, and instructed them distinctly in the knowledge of the Lord, and the people understood
18:9 And Neemias, and Esdras the priest and scribe, and the Levites, and they that instructed the people, spoke and said to all the people, It is a holy day to the Lord our God; do not mourn, nor weep. For all the people wept when they heard the words of the law.
18:10 And
18:11 And the Levites caused all the people to be silent, saying, Be silent, for
18:12 So all the people departed to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, for they understood the words which he made known to them.
18:13 And on the second day the heads of families assembled with all the people,
18:14 And they found written in the law which the Lord commanded Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths, in the feast in the seventh month:
18:15 and that they should sound with trumpets in all their cities, and in Jerusalem. And Esdras said, Go forth to the mountain, and bring branches of olive, and branches of cypress trees, and branches of myrtle, and branches of palm trees, and branches of
18:16 And the people went forth, and brought
18:17 And all the congregation who had returned from the captivity, made booths, and dwelt in booths: for the children of Israel
18:18 And
19:1 Now on the twenty-fourth day of this month the children of Israel assembled with fasting, and in sackcloths, and with ashes on their head.
19:2 And the children of Israel separated themselves from every stranger, and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers.
19:3 And they stood in their place, and read in the book of the law of the Lord their God: and they confessed
19:4 And
19:5 And the Levites, Jesus and Cadmiel, said, Rise up, bless the Lord our God for ever and ever: and let them bless thy glorious name, and exalt it with all blessing and praise.
19:6 And Esdras said, Thou art the only true Lord; thou madest the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, and all their array, the earth, and all things that are in it, the seas, and all things in them; and thou quickenest all things, and the hosts of heaven worship thee.
19:7 Thou art the Lord God, thou didst choose Abram, and broughtest him out of the land of the Chaldeans, and gavest him the name of Abraam:
19:8 and thou foundest his heart faithful before thee, and didst make a covenant with him to give to him and to his seed the land of the Chananites, and the Chettites, and Amorites, and Pherezites, and Jebusites, and Gergesites; and thou hast confirmed thy words, for thou
19:9 And thou sawest the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and thou heardest their cry at the Red Sea.
19:10 And thou shewedst signs and wonders in Egypt, on Pharao and all his servants, and on all the people of his land: for thou knowest that they behaved insolently against them: and thou madest thyself a name, as at this day.
19:11 And thou didst cleave the sea before them, and they passed through the midst of the sea on dry land; and thou didst cast into the deep them that were about to pursue them, as a stone in the mighty water.
19:12 And thou guidedst them by day by a pillar of cloud, and by night by a pillar of fire, to enlighten for them the way wherein they should walk.
19:13 Also thou camest down upon mount Sina, and thou spakest to them out of heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and laws of truth, ordinances, and good commandments.
19:14 And thou didst make known to them thy holy sabbath; thou didst enjoin upon them commandments, and ordinances, and a law, by the hand of thy servant Moses.
19:15 And thou gavest them bread from heaven for their food, and thou broughtest them forth water from a rock for their thirst; and thou badest them go in to inherit the land over which thou stretchedst out thy hand to give
19:16 But they and our fathers behaved proudly, and hardened their neck, and did not hearken to thy commandments,
19:17 and refused to listen, and remembered not thy wonders which thou wroughtest with them; and they hardened their neck, and appointed a leader to return to their slavery in Egypt: but thou, O God,
19:18 And still farther they even made to themselves a molten calf, and said, These
19:19 Yet thou in thy great compassions didst not forsake them in the wilderness: thou didst not turn away from them the pillar of the cloud by day, to guide them in the way, nor the pillar of fire by night, to enlighten for them the way wherein they should walk.
19:20 And thou gavest thy good Spirit to instruct them, and thou didst not withhold thy manna from their mouth, and gavest them water in their thirst.
19:21 And thou didst sustain them forty years in the wilderness; thou didst not allow anything to fail them: their garments did not wax old, and their feet were not bruised.
19:22 Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms, and didst divide nations to them: and they inherited the land of Seon king of Esebon, and the land of Og king of Basan.
19:23 And thou didst multiply their children as the stars of heaven, and broughtest them into the land of which thou spokest to their fathers;
19:24 and they inherited it: and thou didst destroy from before them the dwellers in the land of the Chananites, and thou gavest into their hands them and their kings, and the nations of the land, to do unto them as it pleased them.
19:25 And they took lofty cities, and inherited houses full of all good things, wells dug, vineyards, and oliveyards, and every fruit tree in abundance: so they ate, and were filled, and grew fat, and rioted in thy great goodness.
19:26 But they turned, and revolted from thee, and cast thy law behind their backs; and they slew thy prophets, who testified against them to turn them back to thee, and they wrought great provocations.
19:27 Then thou gavest them into the hand of them that afflicted them, and they did afflict them: and they cried to thee in the time of their affliction, and thou didst hear them from thy heaven, and in thy great compassions gavest them deliverers, and didst save them from the hand of them that afflicted them.
19:28 But when they rested, they did evil again before thee: so thou leftest them in the hands of their enemies, and they ruled over them: and they cried again to thee, and thou heardest
19:29 And thou didst testify against them, to bring them back to thy law: but they hearkened not, but sinned against thy commandments and thy judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them; and they turned their back, and hardened their neck, and heard not.
19:30 Yet thou didst bear long with them many years, and didst testify to them by thy Spirit by the hand of thy prophets: but they hearkened not; so thou gavest them into the hand of the nations of the land.
19:31 But thou in thy many mercies didst not appoint them to destruction, and didst not forsake them; for thou art strong, and merciful, and pitiful.
19:32 And now, O our God, the powerful, the great, the mighty, and the terrible, keeping thy covenant and thy mercy, let not all the trouble seem little in thy sight which has come upon us, and our kings, and our princes, and our priests, and our prophets, and our fathers, and upon all thy people, from the days of the kings of Assur even to this day.
19:33 But thou
19:34 And our kings, and our princes, and our priests, and our fathers, have not performed thy law, and have not given heed to thy commandments, and
19:35 And they did not serve thee in thy kingdom, and in thy great goodness which thou gavest to them, and in the large and fat land which thou didst furnish before them, and they turned not from their evil devices.
19:36 Behold, we are servants this day, and
19:37 and its produce
20:1 And in regard to all these circumstances we make a covenant, and write
20:2 And over them that sealed were Neemias the Artasastha, son of Achalia, and Zedekias,
20:3 the son of Aræa, and Azaria, and Jeremia,
20:4 Phasur, Amaria, Melchia,
20:5 Attus, Sebani, Maluch,
20:6 Iram, Meramoth, Abdia,
20:7 Daniel, Gannathon, Baruch,
20:8 Mesulam, Abia, Miamin,
20:9 Maazia, Belgai, Samaia; these
20:10 And the Levites; Jesus the son of Azania, Banaiu of the sons of Enadad, Cadmiel
20:11 and his brethren, Sabania, Oduia, Calitan, Phelia, Anan,
20:12 Micha, Roob, Asebias,
20:13 Zacchor, Sarabia, Sebania,
20:14 Odum, the sons of Banuæ.
20:15 The heads of the people; Phoros, Phaath Moab, Elam, Zathuia,
20:16 the sons of Bani, Asgad, Bebai,
20:17 Adania, Bagoi, Hedin,
20:18 Ater, Ezekia, Azur,
20:19 Oduia, Esam, Besi,
20:20 Ariph, Anathoth, Nobai,
20:21 Megaphes, Mesullam, Ezir,
20:22 Mesozebel, Saduc, Jeddua,
20:23 Phaltia, Anan, Anæa,
20:24 Osee, Anania, Asub,
20:25 Aloes, Phalaï, Sobec,
20:26 Reum, Essabana, Maasia,
20:27 and Aia, Ænan, Enam,
20:28 Maluch, Eram, Baana.
20:29 And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nathinim, and every one who drew off from the nations of the land to the law of God, their wives, their sons, their daughters, every one who had knowledge and understanding,
20:30 were urgent with their brethren, and bound them under a curse, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in the law of God, which was given by the hand of Moses, the servant of God; to keep and to do all the commandments of the Lord, and his judgments, and his ordinances;
20:31 and that we will not,
20:32 And
20:33 And we will impose ordinances upon ourselves, to levy on ourselves the third part of a didrachm yearly for the service of the house of our God;
20:34 the shewbread, and the continual meat-offering, and for the continual whole-burnt-offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moon, for the feasts, and for the holy things, and the sin-offerings, to make atonement for Israel, and for the works of the house of our God.
20:35 And we cast lots for the office of wood-bearing,
20:36 and to bring the first-fruits of our land, and the first-fruits of the fruit of every tree, year by year, into the house of the Lord:
20:37 the first-born of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is written in the law, and the first-born of our herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, for the priests that minister in the house of our God.
20:38 And the first-fruits of our corn, and the fruit of every tree, of wine, and of oil, will we bring to the priests to the treasury of the house of God; and a tithe of our land to the Levites: for the Levites themselves shall receive tithes in all the cities of the land we cultivate.
20:39 And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites in the tithe of the Levite: and the Levites shall bring up the tenth part of
20:40 For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall bring into the treasuries the first-fruits of the corn, and wine, and oil; and there
21:1 And the chiefs of the people dwelt in Jerusalem: and the rest of the people cast lots, to bring one of
21:2 And the people blessed all the men that volunteered to dwell in Jerusalem.
21:3 Now these
21:4 And there dwelt in Jerusalem
21:5 and Maasia son of Baruch, son of Chalaza, son of Ozia, son of Adaia, son of Joarib, son of Zacharias, son of Seloni.
21:6 All the sons of Phares who dwelt in Jerusalem
21:7 And these
21:8 And after him Gebe, Seli, nine hundred and twenty-eight.
21:9 And Joel son of Zechri
21:10 Of the priests: both Jadia son of Joarib, and Jachin.
21:11 Saraia, son of Elchia, son of Mesulam, son of Sadduc, son of Marioth, son of Ætoth, was over the house of God.
21:12 And their brethren doing the work of the house were eight hundred and twenty-two: and Adaia son of Jeroam, son of Phalalia, son of Amasi, son of Zacharia, son of Phassur, son of Melchia,
21:13 and his brethren, chiefs of families, two hundred and forty-two: and Amasia son of Esdriel, son of Mesarimith, son of Emmer,
21:14 and his brethren, mighty men of war, a hundred and twenty-eight: and
21:15 And of the Levites; Samaia, son of Esricam,
21:17 Matthanias son of Micha, and Jobeb son of Samui,
21:18 two hundred and eighty-four.
21:19 And the porters; Acub, Telamin, and their brethren, a hundred and seventy-two.
21:22 And the overseer of the Levites
21:23 for so was the king's commandment concerning them.
21:24 And Phathaia son of Baseza was in attendance on the king in every matter for the people,
21:25 and with regard to villages in their country district: and
21:26 and in Jesu,
21:27 and in Bersabee:
21:30 and their villages
21:31 And the children of Benjamin
21:36 And of the Levites there were divisions to Juda
22:1 Now these
22:2 Amaria, Maluch,
22:3 Sechenia.
22:7 These
22:8 And the Levites
22:9 were appointed
22:10 And Jesus begot Joakim, and Joakim begot Eliasib, and Eliasib
22:11 and Jodae begot Jonathan, and Jonathan begot Jadu.
22:12 And in the days of Joakim, his brethren the priests and the heads of families
22:13 to Esdra, Mesulam; to Amaria, Joanan;
22:14 to Amaluch, Jonathan; to Sechenia, Joseph;
22:15 to Are, Mannas; to Marioth, Elcaï;
22:16 to Adadai, Zacharia; to Ganathoth, Mesolam;
22:17 to Abia, Zechri; to Miamin, Maadai; to Pheleti,
22:18 to Balgas, Samue; to Semia, Jonathan;
22:19 to Joarib, Matthanai; to Edio, Ozi;
22:20 to Salai, Callai; to Amec, Abed;
22:21 to Elkia, Asabias; to Jedeiu, Nathanael.
22:22 The Levites in the days of Eliasib, Joada, and Joa, and Joanan, and Idua,
22:23 And the sons of Levi, heads of families,
22:24 And the heads of the Levites
22:25 When I gathered the porters,
22:26 it was
22:27 And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites in their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep a feast of dedication and gladness with thanksgiving, and they sounded cymbals with songs, and
22:28 And the sons of the singers were assembled both from the neighbourhood round about to Jerusalem, and from the villages,
22:29 and from the country: for the singers built themselves villages by Jerusalem.
22:30 And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and they purified the people, and the porters, and the wall.
22:31 And they brought up the princes of Juda on the wall, and they appointed two great
22:32 And after them went Osaia, and half the princes of Juda,
22:33 and Azarias, and Esdras, and Mesollam,
22:34 and Juda, and Benjamin, and Samaias and Jeremia.
22:35 And
22:36 and his brethren, Samaia, and Oziel, Gelol, Jama, Aia, Nathanael, and Juda, Anani, to praise with the hymns of David the man of God;
22:37 and Esdras the scribe
22:39 of Ephraim, and to the fish-gate, and by the tower of Anameel, and as far as the sheep-gate.
22:42 And the singers were heard, and were numbered.
22:43 And in that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced; for God had made them very joyful: and their wives and their children rejoiced: and the joy in Jerusalem was heard from afar off.
22:44 And in that day they appointed men over the treasuries, for the treasures, the first-fruits, and the tithes, and
22:45 And they kept the charges of their God, and the charges of the purification, and
22:46 For in the days of David Asaph was originally first of the singers, and
22:47 And all Israel in the days of Zorobabel, and in the days of Neemias, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, a daily rate: and consecrated them to the Levites: and the Levites consecrated them to the sons of Aaron.
23:1 In that day they read in the book of Moses in the ears of the people; and it was found written in it, that the Ammonites and Moabites should not enter into the congregation of God for ever;
23:2 because they met not the children of Israel with bread and water, but hired Balaam against them to curse them: but our God turned the curse into a blessing.
23:3 And it came to pass, when they heard the law, that they were separated,
23:4 And before this time Eliasib the priest dwelt in the treasury of the house of our God, connected with Tobias;
23:5 and he made himself a great treasury, and there they were formerly in the habit of bestowing the offerings, and the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithe of the corn, and the wine, and the oil, the ordered portion of the Levites, and singers, and porters; and the first-fruits of the priests.
23:6 But in all this
23:7 and I came to Jerusalem, and I understood the mischief which Eliasib had done in the case of Tobias, in making for him a treasury in the court of the house of God.
23:8 And it appeared very evil to me: so I cast forth all the furniture of the house of Tobias from the treasury.
23:9 And I gave orders, and they purified the treasuries: and I restored thither the vessels of the house of God,
23:10 And I understood that the portion of the Levites had not been given: and they had fled every one to his field, the Levites and the singers doing the work.
23:11 And I strove with the commanders, and said, Wherefore has the house of God been abandoned? and I assembled them, and set them in their place.
23:12 And all Juda brought a tithe of the wheat and the wine and the oil into the treasuries,
23:13 to the charge of Selemia the priest, and Sadoc the scribe, and Phadæa of the Levites: and next to them
23:14 Remember me, O God, in this, and let not my kindness be forgotten which I have wrought in
23:15 In those days I saw in Juda
23:16 and I testified in the day of their sale. Also there dwelt in it
23:17 And I strove with the free children of Juda, and said to them, What
23:18 Did not your fathers thus, and our God brought upon them and upon us and upon this city all these evils? and do ye bring additional wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath?
23:19 And it came to pass, when the gates were set up in Jerusalem, before the sabbath, that I spoke, and they shut the gates; and I gave orders that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and I set
23:20 So all
23:21 Then I testified against them, and said to them, Why do ye lodge in front of the wall? if ye do so again, I will stretch out my hand upon you. From that time they came not on the sabbath.
23:22 And I told the Levites who were purifying themselves, and came and kept the gates, that they should sanctify the sabbath-day.
23:23 And in those days I saw the Jews who had married women of Ashdod, of Ammon,
23:24 and their children spoke half in the language of Ashdod, and did not know how to speak in the Jewish language.
23:25 And I strove with them and cursed them; and I smote some of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God,
23:26 Did not Solomon king of Israel sin thus? though there was no king like him among many nations, and he was beloved of God, and God made him king over all Israel; yet strange women turned him aside.
23:27 So we will not hearken to you to do all this evil, to break covenant with our God,—to marry strange wives.
23:28 And Elisub the high priest,
23:29 Remember them, O God, for their
23:30 So I purged them from all foreign connection, and established courses for the priests and the Levites,
23:31 And the offering of the wood-bearers