58:1 For the end. Destroy not: by David for a memorial, when Saul sent, and watched his house to kill him.
58:2 Deliver me from mine enemies, O God; and ransom me from those that rise up against me.
58:3 Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.
58:4 For, behold, they have hunted after my soul; violent men have set upon me: neither is it my iniquity, nor my sin, O Lord.
58:5 Without iniquity I ran and directed my course aright: awake to help me, and behold.
58:6 And thou, Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel, draw nigh to visit all the heathen; pity not any that work iniquity. Pause.
58:7 They shall return at evening, and hunger like a dog, and go round about the city.
58:8 Behold, they shall utter a voice with their mouth, and a sword is in their lips; for who, say they, has heard?
58:9 But thou, Lord, wilt laugh them to scorn; thou wilt utterly set at nought all the heathen.
58:10 I will keep my strength, looking to thee; for thou, O God, art my helper.
58:11 As for my God, his mercy shall go before me: my God will shew me vengeance on mine enemies.
58:12 Slay them not, lest they forget thy law; scatter them by thy power; and bring them down, O Lord, my defender.
58:13 For the sin of their mouth, and the word of their lips, let them be even taken in their pride.
58:14 And for their cursing and falsehood shall utter destruction be denounced: they shall fall by the wrath of utter destruction, and shall not be; so shall they know that the God of Jacob is Lord of the ends of the earth. Pause.
58:15 They shall return at evening, and be hungry as a dog, and go round about the city.
58:16 They shall be scattered hither and thither for meat; and if they be not satisfied, they shall even murmur.
58:17 But I will sing to thy strength, and in the morning will I exult in thy mercy; for thou hast been my supporter, and my refuge in the day of mine affliction.
58:18 Thou art my helper; to thee, my God, will I sing; thou art my supporter, O my God, and my mercy.
