1:1 The word of the Lord which came to Joel the son of Bathuel.
1:2 Hear these words, ye elders, and hearken all ye that inhabit the land. Have such things happened in your days, or in the days of your fathers?
1:3 Tell your children concerning them, and let your children tell their children, and their children another generation.
1:4 The leavings of the caterpillar has the locust eaten, and the leavings of the locust has the palmerworm eaten, and the leavings of the palmerworm has the cankerworm eaten.
1:5 Awake, ye drunkards, from your wine, and weep: mourn, all ye that drink wine to drunkenness: for joy and gladness are removed from your mouth.
1:6 For a strong and innumerable nation is come up against my land, their teeth are lion's teeth, and their back teeth those of a lion's whelp.
1:7 He has ruined my vine, and utterly broken my fig-trees: he has utterly searched my vine, and cast it down; he has peeled its branches.
1:8 Lament to me more than a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.
1:9 The meat-offering and drink-offering are removed from the house of the Lord: mourn, ye priests that serve at the altar of the Lord.
1:10 For the plains languish: let the land mourn, for the corn languishes; the wine is dried up, the oil becomes scarce;
1:11 the husbandmen are consumed: mourn your property on account of the wheat and barley; for the harvest has perished from off the field.
1:12 The vine is dried up, and the fig-trees are become few; the pomegranate, and palm-tree, and apple, and all the trees of the field are dried up: for the sons of men have abolished joy.
1:13 Gird yourselves with sackcloth, and lament, ye priests: mourn, ye that serve at the altar: go in, sleep in sackcloths, ye that minister to God: for the meat-offering and drink-offering are withheld from the house of your God.
1:14 Sanctify a fast, proclaim a solemn service, gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of your God, and cry earnestly to the Lord,
1:15 Alas, alas, alas for the day! for the day of the Lord is nigh, and it will come as trouble upon trouble.
1:16 Your meat has been destroyed before your eyes, joy and gladness from out of the house of your God.
1:17 The heifers have started at their mangers, the treasures are abolished, the wine-presses are broken down; for the corn is withered.
1:18 What shall we store up for ourselves? the herds of cattle have mourned, because they had no pasture; and the flocks of sheep have been utterly destroyed.
1:19 To thee, O Lord, will I cry: for fire has devoured the fair places of the wilderness, and a flame has burnt up all the trees of the field.
1:20 And the cattle of the field have looked up to thee: for the fountains of waters have been dried up, and fire has devoured the fair places of the wilderness.
