1:1 And
1:2 Hear
1:3 For, behold, the Lord comes forth out of his place, and will come down, and will go upon the high places of the earth.
1:4 And the mountains shall be shaken under him, and the valleys shall melt like wax before the fire, and as water rushing down a declivity.
1:5 All these
1:6 Therefore I will make Samaria
1:7 And they shall cut in pieces all the graven images, and all that she has hired they shall burn with fire, and I will utterly destroy all her idols: because she has gathered of the hires of fornication, and of the hires of fornication has she amassed
1:8 Therefore shall she lament and wail, she shall go barefooted, and
1:9 For her plague has become grievous; for it has come even to Juda; and has reached to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.
1:10 Ye that are in Geth, exalt not yourselves, and ye Enakim, do not rebuild from
1:11 The inhabitant of Sennaar, fairly inhabiting her cities, came not forth to mourn for the house next to her: she shall receive of you the stroke of grief.
1:12 Who has begun
1:13 even
1:14 Therefore shall he cause men to be sent forth as far as the inheritance of Geth,
1:15 until they bring the heirs, O inhabitant of Lachis: the inheritance shall reach to Odollam,
1:16 Shave thine hair, and make thyself bald for thy delicate children; increase thy widowhood as an eagle; for
2:1 They meditated troubles, and wrought wickedness on their beds, and they put it in execution with the daylight; for they have not lifted up their hands to God.
2:2 And they desired fields, and plundered orphans, and oppressed families, and spoiled a man and his house, even a man and his inheritance.
2:3 Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I devise evils against this family, out of which ye shall not lift up your necks, neither shall ye walk upright speedily: for the time is evil.
2:4 In that day shall a parable be taken up against you, and a plaintive lamentation shall be uttered, saying, We are thoroughly miserable: the portion of my people has been measured out with a line, and there was none to hinder him so as to turn him back; your fields have been divided.
2:5 Therefore thou shalt have no one to cast a line for the lot.
2:6 Weep not with tears in the assembly of the Lord, neither let
2:7 who says, The house of Jacob has provoked the Spirit of the Lord; are not these his practices? Are not the Lord's words right with him? and have they not proceeded correctly?
2:8 Even beforetime my people withstood
2:9 The leaders of my people shall be cast forth from their luxurious houses; they are rejected because of their evil practices; draw ye near to the everlasting mountains.
2:10 Arise thou, and depart; for this is not thy rest because of uncleanness: ye have been utterly destroyed;
2:11 ye have fled, no one pursuing
2:12 Jacob shall be completely gathered with all
2:13 they have broken through, and passed the gate, and gone out by it: and their king has gone out before them, and the Lord shall lead them.
3:1 And he shall say, Hear now these words, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and ye remnant of the house of Israel; is it not for you to know judgment?
3:2 who
3:3 even as they devoured the flesh of my people, and stripped their skins off them, and broke their bones, and divided
3:4 thus they shall cry to the Lord, but he shall not hearken to them; and he shall turn away his face from them at that time, because they have done wickedly in their practices against themselves.
3:5 Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that lead my people astray, that bite with their teeth, and proclaim peace to them; and
3:6 therefore there shall be night to you instead of a vision, and there shall be to you darkness instead of prophecy; and the sun shall go down upon the prophets, and the day shall be dark upon them.
3:7 And the seers of night-visions shall be ashamed, and the prophets shall be laughed to scorn: and all the people shall speak against them, because there shall be none to hearken to them.
3:8 Surely I will strengthen myself with the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of power, to declare to Jacob his transgressions, and to Israel his sins.
3:9 Hear now these words, ye chiefs of the house of Jacob, and the remnant of the house of Israel, who hate judgment, and pervert all righteousness;
3:10 who build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.
3:11 The heads thereof have judged for gifts, and the priests thereof have answered for hire, and her prophets have divined for silver: and
3:12 Therefore on your account Sion shall be ploughed as a field, and Jerusalem shall be as a storehouse of fruits, and the mountain of the house as a grove of the forest.
4:1 And at the last days the mountain of the Lord shall be manifest, established on the tops of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and the peoples shall hasten to it.
4:2 And many nations shall go, and say, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and they shall shew us his way, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Sion shall go forth a law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
4:3 And he shall judge among many peoples, and shall rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into sickles; and nation shall no more lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn to war any more.
4:4 And every one shall rest under his vine, and every one under his fig-tree; and there shall be none to alarm
4:5 For all
4:6 In that day, saith the Lord, I will gather her that is bruised, and will receive her that is cast out, and those whom I rejected.
4:7 And I will make her that was bruised a remnant, and her that was rejected a mighty nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Sion from henceforth, even for ever.
4:8 And thou, dark tower of the flock, daughter of Sion, on thee the dominion shall come and enter in,
4:9 And now, why hast thou known calamities? was there not a king to thee? or has thy counsel perished that pangs as of a woman in travail have seized upon thee?
4:10 Be in pain, and strengthen thyself, and draw near, O daughter of Sion, as a woman in travail: for now thou shalt go forth out of the city, and shalt lodge in the plain, and shalt reach even to Babylon: thence shall the Lord thy God deliver thee, and thence shall he redeem thee out of the hand of thine enemies.
4:11 And now have many nations gathered against thee, saying, We will rejoice, and our eyes shall look upon Sion.
4:12 But they know not the thought of the Lord, and have not understood his counsel: for he has gathered them as sheaves of the floor.
4:13 Arise, and thresh them, O daughter of Sion: for I will make thine horns iron, and I will make thine hoofs brass: and thou shalt utterly destroy many nations, and shalt consecrate their abundance to the Lord, and their strength to the Lord of all the earth.
4:14 Now shall the daughter
5:1 And thou, Bethleem, house of Ephratha, art few in number to be
5:2 Therefore shall he appoint them
5:3 And the Lord shall stand, and see, and feed his flock with power, and they shall dwell in the glory of the name of the Lord their God: for now shall they be magnified to the ends of the earth.
5:4 And she shall have peace when Assur shall come into your land, and when he shall come up upon your country; and there shall be raised up against him seven shepherds, and eight attacks of men.
5:5 And they shall tend the Assyrian with a sword, and the land of Nebrod with her trench: and he shall deliver
5:6 And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many peoples, as dew falling from the Lord, and as lambs on the grass; that none may assemble nor resist among the sons of men.
5:7 And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many nations, as a lion in the forest among cattle, and as a
5:8 Thine hand shall be lifted up against them that afflict thee, and all thine enemies shall be utterly destroyed.
5:9 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord,
5:10 and I will utterly destroy the cities of thy land, and demolish all thy strong-holds:
5:11 and I will utterly destroy thy sorceries out of thine hands; and there shall be no soothsayers in thee.
5:12 And I will utterly destroy thy graven images, and thy statues out of the midst of thee; and thou shalt never any more worship the works of thine hands.
5:13 And I will cut off the groves out of the midst of thee, and I will abolish thy cities.
5:14 And I will execute vengeance on the heathen in anger and wrath, because they hearkened not.
6:1 Hear now a word: the Lord God has said; Arise, plead with the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.
6:2 Hear ye, O mountains, the controversy of the Lord, and
6:3 O my people, what have I done to thee? or wherein have I grieved thee? or wherein have I troubled thee? answer me.
6:4 For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of bondage, and sent before thee Moses, and Aaron, and Mariam.
6:5 O my people, remember now, what counsel Balac king of Moab took against thee, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him, from the reeds to Galgal; that the righteousness of the Lord might be known.
6:6 Wherewithal shall I reach the Lord,
6:7 Will the Lord accept thousands of rams, or ten thousands of fat goats? should I give my first-born for ungodliness, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
6:8 Has it
6:9 The Lord's voice shall be proclaimed in the city, and he shall save those that fear his name: hear, O tribe; and who shall order the city?
6:10 Is there
6:11 Shall the wicked be justified by the balance, or deceitful weights in the bag,
6:12 whereby they have accumulated their ungodly wealth, and they that dwell in the city have uttered falsehoods, and their tongue has been exalted in their mouth?
6:13 Therefore will I begin to smite thee; I will destroy thee in thy sins.
6:14 Thou shalt eat, and shalt not be satisfied; and there shall be darkness upon thee; and he shall depart from
6:15 Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap; thou shalt press the olive, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with oil; and
6:16 For thou hast kept the statutes of Zambri, and
7:1 Alas for me! for I am become as one gathering straw in harvest, and as
7:2 For the godly is perished from the earth; and there is none among men that orders
7:3 they prepare their hands for mischief, the prince asks
7:4 therefore I will take away their goods as a devouring moth, and as one who acts by a
7:5 Trust not in friends, and confide not in guides: beware of thy wife, so as not to commit anything to her.
7:6 For the son dishonours his father, the daughter will rise up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law: those in his house
7:7 But I will look to the Lord; I will wait upon God my Saviour: my God will hearken to me.
7:8 Rejoice not against me, mine enemy; for I have fallen
7:9 I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he make good my cause: he also shall maintain my right, and shall bring me out to the light,
7:10 And she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shall clothe herself with shame, who says, Where
7:11 It is
7:12 And thy cities shall be levelled, and parted among the Assyrians; and thy strong cities shall be parted from Tyre to the river, and from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.
7:13 And the land shall be utterly desolate together with them that inhabit it, because of the fruit of their doings.
7:14 Tend thy people with thy rod, the sheep of thine inheritance, those that inhabit by themselves the thicket in the midst of Carmel: they shall feed in the land of Basan, and in the land of Galaad, as in the days of old.
7:15 And according to the days of thy departure out of Egypt shall ye see marvellous
7:16 The nations shall see and be ashamed; and at all their might they shall lay their hands upon their mouth, their ears shall be deafened.
7:17 They shall lick the dust as serpents crawling on the earth, they shall be confounded in their holes; they shall be amazed at the Lord our God, and will be afraid of thee.
7:18 Who is a God like thee, cancelling iniquities, and passing over the sins of the remnant of his inheritance? and he has not kept his anger for a testimony, for he delights in mercy.
7:19 He will return and have mercy upon us; he will sink our iniquities, and they shall be cast into the depths of the sea,
7:20 He shall give blessings truly to Jacob, and mercy to Abraam, as thou swarest to our fathers, according to the former days.