34:1 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
34:2 Charge the children of Israel, and thou shalt say to them, Ye are entering into the land of Chanaan: it shall be to you for an inheritance, the land of Chanaan with its boundaries.
34:3 And your southern side shall be from the wilderness of Sin to the border of Edom, and your border southward shall extend on the side of the salt sea eastward.
34:4 And your border shall go round you from the south to the ascent of Acrabin, and shall proceed by Ennac, and the going forth of it shall be southward to Cades Barne, and it shall go forth to the village of Arad, and shall proceed by Asemona.
34:5 And the border shall compass from Asemona to the river of Egypt, and the sea shall be the termination.
34:6 And ye shall have your border on the west, the great sea shall be the boundary: this shall be to you the border on the west.
34:7 And this shall be your northern border; from the great sea ye shall measure to yourselves, by the side of the mountain.
34:8 And ye shall measure to yourselves the mountain from mount Hor at the entering in to Emath, and the termination of it shall be the coasts of Saradac.
34:9 And the border shall go out to Dephrona, and its termination shall be at Arsenain; this shall be your border from the north.
34:10 And ye shall measure to yourselves the eastern border from Arsenain to Sepphamar.
34:11 And the border shall go down from Sepphamar to Bela eastward to the fountains, and the border shall go down from Bela behind the sea Chenereth eastward.
34:12 And the border shall go down to Jordan, and the termination shall be the salt sea; this shall be your land and its borders round about.
34:13 And Moses charged the children of Israel, saying, This is the land which ye shall inherit by lot, even as the Lord commanded us to give it to the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasse.
34:14 For the tribe of the children of Ruben, and the tribe of the children of Gad have received their inheritance according to their families; and the half-tribe of Manasse have received their inheritances.
34:15 Two tribes and half a tribe have received their inheritance beyond Jordan by Jericho from the south eastwards.
34:16 And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,
34:17 These are the names of the men who shall divide the land to you for an inheritance; Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Naue.
34:18 And ye shall take one ruler from each tribe to divide the land to you by lot.
34:19 And these are the names of the men; of the tribe of Juda, Chaleb the son of Jephonne.
34:20 Of the tribe of Symeon, Salamiel the son of Semiud.
34:21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Eldad the son of Chaslon.
34:22 Of the tribe of Dan the prince was Bacchir the son of Egli.
34:23 Of the sons of Joseph of the tribe of the sons of Manasse, the prince was Aniel the son of Suphi.
34:24 Of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim, the prince was Camuel the son of Sabathan.
34:25 Of the tribe of Zabulon, the prince was Elisaphan the son of Pharnac.
34:26 Of the tribe of the sons of Issachar, the prince was Phaltiel the son of Oza.
34:27 Of the tribe of the children of Aser, the prince was Achior the son of Selemi.
34:28 Of the tribe of Nephthali, the prince was Phadael the son of Jamiud.
34:29 These did the Lord command to distribute the inheritances to the children of Israel in the land of Chanaan.
