26:1 In that day they shall sing this song in the land of Judea; Behold a strong city; and he shall make salvation its wall and bulwark.
26:2 Open ye the gates, let the nation enter that keeps righteousness, and keeps truth,
26:3 supporting truth, and keeping peace: for on thee, O Lord,
26:4 they have trusted with confidence for ever, the great, the eternal God;
26:5 who hast humbled and brought down them that dwell on high, thou shalt cast down strong cities, and bring them to the ground.
26:6 And the feet of the meek and lowly shall trample them.
26:7 The way of the godly is made straight: the way of the godly is also prepared.
26:8 For the way of the Lord is judgment: we have hoped in thy name, and on the remembrance of thee,
26:9 which our soul longs for: my spirit seeks thee very early in the morning, O God, for thy commandments are a light on the earth: learn righteousness, ye that dwell upon the earth.
26:10 For the ungodly one is put down: no one who will not learn righteousness on the earth, shall be able to do the truth: let the ungodly be taken away, that he see not the glory of the Lord.
26:11 O Lord, thine arm is exalted, yet they knew it not: but when they know they shall be ashamed: jealousy shall seize upon an untaught nation, and now fire shall devour the adversaries.
26:12 O Lord our God, give us peace: for thou hast rendered to us all things.
26:13 O Lord our God, take possession of us: O Lord, we know not any other beside thee: we name thy name.
26:14 But the dead shall not see life, neither shall physicians by any means raise them up: therefore thou hast brought wrath upon them, and slain them, and hast taken away every male of them. Bring more evils upon them, O Lord;
26:15 bring more evils on the glorious ones of the earth.
26:16 Lord, in affliction I remembered thee; thy chastening was to us with small affliction.
26:17 And as a woman in travail draws nigh to be delivered, and cries out in her pain; so have we been to thy beloved.
26:18 We have conceived, O Lord, because of thy fear, and have been in pain, and have brought forth the breath of thy salvation, which we have wrought upon the earth: we shall not fall, but all that dwell upon the land shall fall.
26:19 The dead shall rise, and they that are in the tombs shall be raised, and they that are in the earth shall rejoice: for the dew from thee is healing to them: but the land of the ungodly shall perish.
26:20 Go, my people, enter into thy closets, shut thy door, hide thyself for a little season, until the anger of the Lord have passed away.
26:21 For, behold, the Lord is bringing wrath from his holy place upon the dwellers on the earth: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall not cover her slain.
