4:1 What shall we say then that Abraham our father, as pertaining to the flesh, hath found?
4:2 For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath
4:3 For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness.
4:4 Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.
4:5 But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.
4:6 Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works,
4:7 Saying, Blessed
4:8 Blessed
4:9 Cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision
4:10 How was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
4:11 And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which
4:12 And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which
4:13 For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world,
4:14 For if they which are of the law
4:15 Because the law worketh wrath: for where no law is,
4:16 Therefore
4:17 (As it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations,) before him whom he believed,
4:18 Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many nations, according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed be.
4:19 And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah’s womb:
4:20 He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God;
4:21 And being fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform.
4:22 And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.
4:23 Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him;
4:24 But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead;
4:25 Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification.
