9:1 Wisdom has built a house for herself, and set up seven pillars.
9:2 She has killed her beasts; she has mingled her wine in a bowl, and prepared her table.
9:3 She has sent forth her servants, calling with a loud proclamation to the feast, saying,
9:4 Whoso is foolish, let him turn aside to me: and to them that want understanding she says,
9:5 Come, eat of my bread, and drink wine which I have mingled for you.
9:6 Leave folly, that ye may reign for ever; and seek wisdom, and improve understanding by knowledge.
9:7 He that reproves evil men shall get dishonour to himself; and he that rebukes an ungodly man shall disgrace himself.
9:8 Rebuke not evil men, lest they should hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.
9:9 Give an opportunity to a wise man, and he will be wiser: instruct a just man, and he will receive more instruction.
9:10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the counsel of saints is understanding:
9:10a for to know the law is the character of a sound mind.
9:11 For in this way thou shalt live long, and years of thy life shall be added to thee.
9:12 Son, if thou be wise for thyself, thou shalt also be wise for thy neighbours; and if thou shouldest prove wicked, thou alone wilt bear the evil.
9:12a He that stays himself upon falsehoods, attempts to rule the winds, and the same will pursue birds in their flight:
9:12b for he has forsaken the ways of his own vineyard, and he has caused the axles of his own husbandry to go astray;
9:12c and he goes through a dry desert, and a land appointed to drought, and he gathers barrenness with his hands.
9:13 A foolish and bold woman, who knows not modesty, comes to want a morsel.
9:14 She sits at the doors of her house, on a seat openly in the streets,
9:15 calling to passers by, and to those that are going right on their ways;
9:16 saying, Whoso is most senseless of you, let him turn aside to me; and I exhort those that want prudence, saying,
9:17 Take and enjoy secret bread, and the sweet water of theft.
9:18 But he knows that mighty men die by her, and he falls in with a snare of hell.
9:18a But hasten away, delay not in the place, neither fix thine eye upon her:
9:18b for thus shalt thou go through strange water;
9:18c but do thou abstain from strange water, and drink not of a strange fountain,
9:18d that thou mayest live long, and years of life may be added to thee.
