1:1 The Proverbs of Solomon son of David, who reigned in Israel;
1:2 to know wisdom and instruction, and to perceive words of understanding;
1:3 to receive also hard sayings, and to understand true justice, and how to direct judgment;
1:4 that he might give subtlety to the simple, and to the young man discernment and understanding.
1:5 For by the hearing of these a wise man will be wiser, and the man of understanding will gain direction;
1:6 and will understand a parable, and a dark speech; the sayings of the wise also, and riddles.
1:7 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and there is good understanding to all that practise it: and piety toward God is the beginning of discernment; but the ungodly will set at nought wisdom and instruction.
1:8 Hear, my son, the instruction of thy father, and reject not the rules of thy mother.
1:9 For thou shalt receive for thine head a crown of graces, and a chain of gold round thy neck.
1:10 My son, let not ungodly men lead thee astray, neither consent thou to them.
1:11 If they should exhort thee, saying, Come with us, partake in blood, and let us unjustly hide the just man in the earth:
1:12 and let us swallow him alive, as Hades would, and remove the memorial of him from the earth:
1:13 let us seize on his valuable property, and let us fill our houses with spoils:
1:14 but do thou cast in thy lot with us, and let us all provide a common purse, and let us have one pouch:
1:15 go not in the way with them, but turn aside thy foot from their paths:
1:17 for nets are not without cause spread for birds.
1:18 For they that are concerned in murder store up evils for themselves; and the overthrow of transgressors is evil.
1:19 These are the ways of all that perform lawless deeds; for by ungodliness they destroy their own life.
1:20 Wisdom sings aloud in passages, and in the broad places speaks boldly.
1:21 And she makes proclamation on the top of the walls, and sits by the gates of princes; and at the gates of the city boldly says,
1:22 So long as the simple cleave to justice, they shall not be ashamed: but the foolish being lovers of haughtiness, having become ungodly have hated knowledge, and are become subject to reproofs.
1:23 Behold, I will bring forth to you the utterance of my breath, and I will instruct you in my speech.
1:24 Since I called, and ye did not hearken; and I spoke at length, and ye gave no heed;
1:25 but ye set at nought my counsels, and disregarded my reproofs;
1:26 therefore I also will laugh at your destruction; and I will rejoice against you when ruin comes upon you:
1:27 yea when dismay suddenly comes upon you, and your overthrow shall arrive like a tempest; and when tribulation and distress shall come upon you, or when ruin shall come upon you.
1:28 For it shall be that when ye call upon me, I will not hearken to you: wicked men shall seek me, but shall not find me.
1:29 For they hated wisdom, and did not choose the word of the Lord:
1:30 neither would they attend to my counsels, but derided my reproofs.
1:31 Therefore shall they eat the fruits of their own way, and shall be filled with their own ungodliness.
1:32 For because they wronged the simple, they shall be slain; and an inquisition shall ruin the ungodly.
1:33 But he that hearkens to me shall dwell in confidence, and shall rest securely from all evil.
