1:1 [
1:2 a Jew dwelling in the city Susa, a great man, serving in the king's palace, saw a vision.
1:3 Now he was of the captivity which Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had carried captive from Jerusalem, with Jechonias the king of Judea.
1:4 And this
1:5 And, behold, two great serpents came forth, both ready for conflict, and there came from them a great voice,
1:6 and by their voice every nation was prepared for battle, even to fight against the nation of the just.
1:7 And, behold, a day of darkness and blackness, tribulation and anguish, affliction and great tumult upon the earth.
1:8 And all the righteous nation was troubled, fearing their own afflictions; and they prepared to die, and cried to God:
1:9 and from their cry there came as it were a great river from a little fountain,
1:10 And light and the sun arose, and the lowly were exalted, and devoured the honourable.
1:11 And Mardochæus who had seen this vision and what God designed to do, having awoke, kept it in his heart, and desired by all means to interpret it, even till night.
1:12 And Mardochæus rested quiet in the palace with Gabatha and Tharrha the king's two chamberlains, eunuchs who guarded the palace.
1:13 And he heard their reasonings and searched out their plans, and learnt that they were preparing to lay hands on king Artaxerxes: and he informed the king concerning them.
1:14 And the king examined the two chamberlains, and they confessed, and were executed.
1:15 And the king wrote these things for a memorial; also Mardochæus wrote concerning these matters.
1:16 And the king commanded Mardochæus to attend in the palace, and gave him gifts for this service.
1:17 And Aman the son of Amadathes the Bugæan was honourable in the sight of the king, and he endeavoured to hurt Mardochæus and his people, because of the two chamberlains of the king.]
1:18 And it came to pass after these things in the days of Artaxerxes,—(this Artaxerxes ruled over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces from India)—
1:2 in those days, when king Artaxerxes was on the throne in the city of Susa,
1:3 in the third year of his reign, he made a feast to his friends, and the other nations, and to the nobles of the Persians and Medes, and the chief of the satraps.
1:4 And after this, after he had shewn to them the wealth of his kingdom, and the abundant glory of his wealth during a hundred and eighty days,
1:5 when,
1:6 which was
1:7 gold and silver cups, and a small cup of carbuncle set out of the value of thirty thousand talents, abundant and sweet wine, which the king himself drank.
1:8 And this banquet was not according to the appointed law; but so the king would have it: and he charged the stewards to perform his will and that of the company.
1:9 Also Astin the queen made a banquet for the women in the palace where king Artaxerxes
1:10 Now on the seventh day the king, being merry, told Aman, and Bazan, and Tharrha, and Barazi, and Zatholtha, and Abataza, and Tharaba, the seven chamberlains, servants of king Artaxerxes,
1:11 to bring in the queen to him, to enthrone her, and crown her with the diadem, and to shew her to the princes, and her beauty to the nations: for she was beautiful.
1:12 But queen Astin hearkened not to him to come with the chamberlains: so the king was grieved and angered.
1:13 And he said to his friends, Thus has Astin spoken: pronounce therefore upon this
1:14 So Arkesæus, and Sarsathæus, and Malisear, the princes of the Persians and Medes, who were near the king, who sat chief
1:15 and reported to him according to the laws how it was proper to do to queen Astin, because she had not done the things commanded of the king by the chamberlains.
1:16 And Muchæus said to the king and to the princes, Queen Astin has not wronged the king only, but also all the king's rulers and princes:
1:17 for he has told them the words of the queen, and how she disobeyed the king. As then,
1:18 so this day shall the other ladies of the chiefs of the Persians and Medes, having heard what she said to the king, dare in the same way to dishonour their husbands.
1:19 If then it seem good to the king, let him make a royal decree, and let it be written according to the laws of the Medes and Persians, and let him not alter
1:20 And let the law of the king which he shall have made, be widely proclaimed, in his kingdom: and so shall all the women give honour to their husbands, from the poor even to the rich.
1:21 And the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did as Muchæus had said,
1:22 and sent into all his kingdom through the several provinces, according to their language, in order that men might be feared in their own houses.
2:1 And after this the king's anger was pacified, and he no more mentioned Astin, bearing in mind what she had said, and how he had condemned her.
2:2 Then the servants of the king said, Let there be sought for the king chaste
2:3 And let the king appoint local governors in all the provinces of his kingdom, and let them select fair
2:4 And let the woman who shall please the king be queen instead of Astin. And the thing pleased the king; and he did so.
2:5 Now there was a Jew in the city Susa, and his name was Mardochæus, the
2:6 who had been brought a prisoner from Jerusalem, which Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had carried into captivity.
2:7 And he had a foster-child, daughter of Aminadab his father's brother, and her name
2:8 And because the king's ordinance was published, many damsels were gathered to the city Susa under the hand of Gai; and Esther was brought to Gai the keeper of the women.
2:9 And the damsel pleased him, and she found favour in his sight; and he hasted to give her the things for purification, and her portion, and the seven maidens appointed her out of the palace: and he treated her and her maidens well in the women's apartment.
2:10 But Esther discovered not her family nor her kindred: for Mardochæus had charged her not to tell.
2:11 But Mardochæus used to walk every day by the women's court, to see what would become of Esther.
2:12 Now this was the time for a virgin to go in to the king, when she should have fulfilled twelve months; for so are the days of purification fulfilled, six months while they are anointing themselves with oil of myrrh, and six months with spices and women's purifications.
2:13 And then
2:14 She enters in the evening, and in the morning she departs to the second women's apartment, where Gai the king's chamberlain
2:15 And when the time was fulfilled for Esther the daughter of Aminadab the brother of Mardochæus' father to go in to the king, she neglected nothing which the chamberlain, the women's keeper, commanded; for Esther found grace in the sight of all that looked upon her.
2:16 So Esther went in to king Artaxerxes in the twelfth month, which is Adar, in the seventh year of his reign.
2:17 And the king loved Esther, and she found favour beyond all the
2:18 And the king made a banquet for all his friends and great men for seven days, and he highly celebrated the marriage of Esther; and he made a release to those who were under his dominion.
2:19 But Mardochæus served in the palace.
2:20 Now Esther had not discovered her kindred; for so Mardochæus commanded her, to fear God, and perform his commandments, as when she was with him: and Esther changed not her manner of life.
2:21 And two chamberlains of the king, the chiefs of the body-guard, were grieved, because Mardochæus was promoted; and they sought to kill king Artaxerxes.
2:22 And the matter was discovered to Mardochæus, and he made it known to Esther, and she declared to the king the matter of the conspiracy.
2:23 And the king examined the two chamberlains, and hanged them: and the king gave orders to make a note for a memorial in the royal records of the good offices of Mardochæus, as a commendation.
3:1 And after this king Artaxerxes highly honoured Aman
3:2 And all in the palace did him obeisance, for so the king had given orders to do: but Mardochæus did not do him obeisance.
3:3 And they in the king's palace said to Mardochæus, Mardochæus, why dost thou transgress the commands of the king?
3:4 Thus
3:5 And when Aman understood that Mardochæus did not obeisance to him, he was greatly enraged,
3:6 and took counsel to destroy utterly all the Jews who were under the rule of Artaxerxes.
3:7 And he made a decree in the twelfth year of the reign of Artaxerxes, and cast lots daily and monthly, to slay in one day the race of Mardochæus: and the lot fell on the fourteenth
3:8 And he spoke to king Artaxerxes, saying, There is a nation scattered among the nations in all thy kingdom, and their laws differ from
3:9 If it seem good to the king, let him make a decree to destroy them: and I will remit into the king's treasury ten thousand talents of silver.
3:10 And the king took off his ring, and gave it into the hands of Aman, to seal the decrees against the Jews.
3:11 And the king said to Aman, Keep the silver, and treat the nation as thou wilt.
3:12 So the king's recorders were called in the first month, on the thirteenth
3:13 And
3:14 [And the following is the copy of the letter; The great king Artaxerxes writes thus to the rulers and inferior governors of a hundred and twenty-seven provinces, from India even to Ethiopia, who hold authority under
3:15 Ruling over many nations, and having obtained dominion over the whole world, I was minded, (not elated by the confidence of power, but ever conducting
3:16 But when I had enquired of my counsellors how this should be brought to pass, Aman, who excels in soundness of judgment among us, and has been manifestly well inclined without wavering and with unshaken fidelity, and has obtained the second post in the kingdom,
3:17 informed us that a certain ill-disposed people is mixed up with all the tribes throughout the world, opposed in their laws to every
3:18 Having then conceived that this nation alone
3:19 we have accordingly appointed those who are signified to you in the letters written by Aman, who is set over
3:20 that the people aforetime and now ill-disposed
3:14 And the copies of the letters were published in every province; and an order was given to all the nations to be ready against that day.
3:15 And the business was hastened, and
4:1 But Mardochæus having perceived what was done, rent his garments, and put on sackcloth, and sprinkled dust upon himself; and having rushed forth through the open street of the city, he cried with a loud voice, A nation that has done no wrong is going to be destroyed.
4:2 And he came to the king's gate, and stood; for it was not lawful for him to enter into the palace, wearing sackcloth and ashes.
4:3 And in every province where the letters were published,
4:4 And the queen's maids and chamberlains went in and told her: and when she had heard what was done, she was disturbed; and she sent to clothe Mardochæus, and take away his sackcloth; but he consented not.
4:5 So Esther called for her chamberlain Achrathæus, who waited upon her; and she sent to learn the truth from Mardochæus.
4:7 And Mardochæus shewed him what was done, and the promise which Aman had made the king of ten thousand talents
4:8 And he gave him the copy
4:9 So Achrathæus went in and told her all these words.
4:10 And Esther said to Achrathæus, Go to Mardochæus, and say,
4:11 All the nations of the empire know, that whoever, man or woman, shall go in to the king into the inner court uncalled, that person cannot live: only to whomsoever the king shall stretch out
4:12 And Achrathæus reported to Mardochæus all the words of Esther.
4:13 Then Mardochæus said to Achrathæus, Go, and say to her, Esther, say not to thyself that thou alone wilt escape in the kingdom, more than all the
4:14 For if thou shalt refuse to hearken on this occasion, help and protection will be to the Jews from another quarter; but thou and thy father's house will perish: and who knows, if thou hast been made queen for this
4:15 And Esther sent the
4:16 Go and assemble the Jews that are in Susa, and fast ye for me, and eat not and drink not for three days, night and day: and I also and my maidens will fast; and then I will go in to the king contrary to the law, even if I must die.
4:17 So Mardochæus went and did all that Esther commanded him.
4:18 [And he besought the Lord, making mention of all the works of the Lord; and he said,
4:19 Lord God, king ruling over all, for all things are in thy power, and there is no one that shall oppose thee in thy purpose to save Israel.—
4:20 For thou hast made the heaven and the earth, and every wonderful thing in the
4:21 Thou knowest all things: thou knowest, Lord, that it is not in insolence, nor haughtiness, nor love of glory, that I have done this, to refuse obeisance to the haughty Aman. For I would gladly have kissed the soles of his feet for the safety of Israel.
4:22 But I have done this, that I might not set the glory of man above the glory of God: and I will not worship any one except thee, my Lord, and I will not do these things in haughtiness.
4:23 And now, O Lord God, the King, the God of Abraam, spare thy people, for
4:24 Do not overlook thy peculiar people, whom thou hast redeemed for thyself out of the land of Egypt.
4:25 Hearken to my prayer, and be propitious to thine inheritance, and turn our mourning into gladness, that we may live and sing praise to thy name, O Lord; and do not utterly destroy the mouth of them that praise thee, O Lord.
4:26 And all Israel cried with
4:27 And queen Esther betook herself for refuge to the Lord, being taken
4:28 O my Lord, thou alone art our king: help me
4:29 I have heard from my birth, in the tribe of my kindred, that thou, Lord, tookest Israel out of all the nations, and our fathers out of all their kindred for a perpetual inheritance, and hast wrought for them all that thou hast said.
4:30 And now we have sinned before thee, and thou hast delivered us into the hands of our enemies, because we honoured their gods: thou art righteous, O Lord.
4:31 But now they have not been contented with the bitterness of our slavery, but have laid their hands on the hands of their idols,
4:32 and to open the mouth of the Gentiles to
4:33 O Lord, do not resign thy sceptre to them that are not, and let them not laugh at our fall, but turn their counsel against themselves, and make an example of him who has begun
4:34 Remember
4:35 Put harmonious speech into my mouth before the lion, and turn his heart to hate him that fights against us, to the utter destruction of him and of them that consent with him.
4:36 But deliver us by thine hand, and help me
4:37 Thou knowest all things, and knowest that I hate the glory of transgressors, and that I abhor the couch of the uncircumcised, and of every stranger.
4:38 Thou knowest my necessity, for I abhor the symbol of my proud station, which is upon my head in the days of my splendour: I abhor it as a menstruous cloth, and I wear it not in the days of my tranquillity.
4:39 And thy handmaid has not eaten
4:40 Neither has thy handmaid rejoiced since the day of my promotion until now, except in thee, O Lord God of Abraam.
4:41 O God, who hast power over all, hearken to the voice of the desperate, and deliver us from the hand of them that devise mischief; and deliver me from my fear.
5:1 And it came to pass on the third day, when she had ceased praying, that she put off her mean dress, and put on her glorious apparel.
5:2 And being splendidly arrayed,
5:3 And she
5:4 And having passed through all the doors, she stood before the king: and he was sitting upon his royal throne, and he had put on all his glorious apparel,
5:5 And having raised his face resplendent with glory, he looked with intense anger: and the queen fell, and changed her colour as she fainted; and she bowed herself upon the head of the maid that went before
5:6 But God changed the spirit of the king to gentleness, and in intense feeling he sprang from off his throne, and took her into his arms, until she recovered: and he comforted her with peaceable words, and said to her,
5:7 What is
5:2 And having raised the golden sceptre he laid it upon her neck, and embraced her, and said, Speak to me.
5:3 And she said to him, I saw thee,
5:4 And while she was speaking, she fainted and fell. Then the king was troubled, and all his servants comforted her.]
5:3 And the king said, What wilt thou, Esther? and what is thy request?
5:4 And Esther said, To-day is my great day: if then it seem good to the king, let both him and Aman come to the feast which I will prepare this day.
5:5 And the king said, Hasten Aman hither, that we may perform the word of Esther. So they both come to the feast of which Esther had spoken.
5:6 And at the banquet the king said to Esther, What is
5:7 And she said, My request and my petition
5:8 if I have found favour in the sight of the king, let the king and Aman come again to-morrow to the feast which I shall prepare for them, and to-morrow I will do the same.
5:9 So Aman went out from the king very glad
5:10 And having gone into his own house, he called his friends, and his wife Zosara.
5:11 And he shewed them his wealth, and the glory with which the king had invested him, and how he had caused him to take precedence and bear chief rule in the kingdom.
5:12 And Aman said, The queen has called no one to the feast with the king but me, and I am invited to-morrow.
5:13 But these things please me not, while I see Mardochæus the Jew in the court.
5:14 And Zosara his wife and his friends said to him, Let there be a gallows made for thee of fifty cubits, and in the morning do thou speak to the king, and let Mardochæus be hanged on the gallows: but do thou go in to the feast with the king, and be merry. And the saying pleased Aman, and the gallows was prepared.
6:1 But the Lord removed sleep from the king that night: and he told his servant to bring in the books, the registers of daily events, to read to him.
6:2 And he found the records written concerning Mardochæus, how he had told the king concerning the two chamberlains of the king, when they were keeping guard, and sought to lay hands on Artaxerxes.
6:3 And the king said, What honour or favour have we done to Mardochæus? And the king's servants said, Thou hast not done anything to him.
6:4 And while the king was enquiring about the kindness of Mardochæus, behold, Aman
6:5 And the king's servants said, Behold, Aman stands in the court. And the king said, Call him.
6:6 And the king said to Aman, What shall I do to the man whom I wish to honour? And Aman said within himself, Whom would the king honour but myself?
6:7 and he said to the king, As for the man whom the king wishes to honour,
6:8 let the king's servants bring the robe of fine linen which the king puts on, and the horse on which the king rides,
6:9 and let him give
6:10 Then the king said to Aman, Thou hast well said: so do to Mardochæus the Jew, who waits in the palace, and let not a word of what thou hast spoken be neglected.
6:11 So Aman took the robe and the horse, and arrayed Mardochæus, and mounted him on the horse, and went through the street of the city, and proclaimed, saying, Thus shall it be to every man whom the king wishes to honour.
6:12 And Mardochæus returned to the palace: but Aman went home mourning, and having his head covered.
6:13 And Aman related the events that had befallen him to Zosara his wife, and to
6:14 While they were yet speaking, the chamberlains arrived, to hasten Aman to the banquet which Esther had prepared.
7:1 So the king and Aman went in to drink with the queen.
7:2 And the king said to Esther at the banquet on the second day, What is it, queen Esther? and what
7:3 And she answered and said, If I have found favour in the sight of the king, let
7:4 For both I and my people are sold for destruction, and pillage, and slavery;
7:5 And the king said, Who
7:6 And Esther said, The adversary
7:7 And the king rose up from the banquet to go into the garden: and Aman began to intreat the queen; for he saw that he was in an evil case.
7:8 And the king returned from the garden; and Aman had fallen upon the bed, intreating the queen. And the king said, Wilt thou even force
7:9 And Bugathan, one of the chamberlains, said to the king, Behold, Aman has also prepared a gallows for Mardochæus, who spoke concerning the king, and a gallows of fifty cubits high has been set up in the premises of Aman. And the king said, Let him be hanged thereon.
7:10 So Aman was hanged on the gallows that had been prepared for Mardochæus: and then the king's wrath was appeased.
8:1 And in that day king Artaxerxes gave to Esther all that belonged to Aman the slanderer: and Mardochæus was called by the king; for Esther had shewn that he was related to her.
8:2 And the king took the ring which he had taken away from Aman, and gave it to Mardochæus: and Esther appointed Mardochæus over all that had been Aman's.
8:3 And she spoke yet again to the king, and fell at his feet, and besought
8:4 Then the king stretched out to Esther the golden sceptre: and Esther arose to stand near the king.
8:5 And Esther said, If it seem good to thee, and I have found favour
8:6 For how shall I be able to look upon the affliction of my people, and how shall I be able to survive the destruction of my kindred?
8:7 And the king said to Esther, If I have given and freely granted thee all that was Aman's, and hanged him on a gallows, because he laid his hands upon the Jews, what dost thou yet further seek?
8:8 Write ye also in my name, as it seems good to you, and seal
8:9 So the scribes were called in the first month, which is Nisan, on the three and twentieth day of the same year; and
8:10 And they were written by order of the king, and sealed with his ring, and they sent the letters by the posts:
8:11 wherein he charged them to use their
8:12 on one day in all the kingdom of Artaxerxes, on the thirteenth
8:13 And the following is the copy of the letter of the orders.
8:14 [The great king Artaxerxes sends greeting to the rulers of provinces
8:15 Many who have been frequently honoured by the most abundant kindness of their benefactors have conceived ambitious designs, and not only endeavour to hurt our subjects, but moreover, not being able to bear prosperity, they also endeavour to plot against their own benefactors.
8:16 And they not only would utterly abolish gratitude from among men, but also, elated by the boastings of men who are strangers to all that is good, they suppose that they shall escape the sin-hating vengeance of the ever-seeing God.
8:17 And oftentimes
8:18 while
8:19 And it is possible to see
8:20 And
8:21 adopting
8:22 For whereas Aman, a Macedonian, the son of Amadathes, in reality an alien from the blood of the Persians, and differing widely from our mild course of government, having been hospitably entertained by us,
8:23 obtained so large a share of our universal kindness, as to be called our father, and to continue the person next to the royal throne, reverenced of all;
8:24 he, however
8:25 having by various and subtle artifices demanded for destruction both Mardochæus our deliverer and perpetual benefactor, and Esther the blameless consort of
8:26 For by these methods he thought, having surprised us in a defenceless state, to transfer the dominion of the Persians to the Macedonians.
8:27 But we find that the Jews, who have been consigned to destruction by the most abominable of men, are not malefactors, but living according to the justest laws,
8:28 and being the sons of the living God, the most high and mighty, who maintains the kingdom, to us as well as to our forefathers, in the most excellent order.
8:29 Ye will therefore do well in refusing to obey the letters sent by Aman the son of Amadathes, because he that has done these things, has been hanged with his whole family at the gates of Susa, Almighty God having swiftly returned to him a worthy recompence.
8:30 We enjoin you
8:31 For in the place of the destruction of the chosen race, Almighty God has granted them this
8:32 Do ye therefore also, among your
8:33 And every city and province collectively, which shall not do accordingly, shall be consumed with vengeance by spear and fire: it shall be made not only inaccessible to men, but also most hateful to wild beasts and birds for ever.]
8:13 And let the copies be posted in conspicuous places throughout the kingdom, and let all the Jews be ready against this day, to fight against their enemies.
8:14 So the horsemen went forth with haste to perform the king's commands; and the ordinance was also published in Susa.
8:15 And Mardochæus went forth robed in the royal apparel, and wearing a golden crown, and a diadem of fine purple linen: and the people in Susa saw
8:16 And the Jews had light and gladness,
8:17 in every city and province wherever the ordinance was published: wherever the proclamation took place, the Jews had joy and gladness, feasting and mirth: and many of the Gentiles were circumcised, and became Jews, for fear of the Jews.
9:1 For in the twelfth month, on the thirteenth day of the month which is Adar, the letters written by the king arrived.
9:2 In that day the adversaries of the Jews perished: for no one resisted, through fear of them.
9:3 For the chiefs of the satraps, and the princes and the royal scribes, honoured the Jews; for the fear of Mardochæus lay upon them.
9:4 For the order of the king was in force, that he should be celebrated in all the kingdom.
9:6 And in the city Susa the Jews slew five hundred men:
9:7 both Pharsannes, and Delphon and Phasga,
9:8 and Pharadatha, and Barea, and Sarbaca,
9:9 and Marmasima, and Ruphæus, and Arsæus, and Zabuthæus,
9:10 the ten sons of Aman the son of Amadathes the Bugæan, the enemy of the Jews, and they plundered
9:11 and the number of them that perished in Susa was rendered to the king.
9:12 And the king said to Esther, The Jews have slain five hundred men in the city Susa; and how, thinkest thou, have they used them in the rest of the country? What then dost thou yet ask, that it may be
9:13 And Esther said to the king, Let it be granted to the Jews so to treat them to-morrow as to hang the ten sons of Aman.
9:14 And he permitted it to be so done; and he gave up to the Jews of the city the bodies of the sons of Aman to hang.
9:15 And the Jews assembled in Susa on the fourteenth
9:16 And the rest of the Jews who were in the kingdom assembled, and helped one another, and obtained rest from their enemies: for they destroyed fifteen thousand of them on the thirteenth
9:17 And they rested on the fourteenth of the same month, and kept it as a day of rest with joy and gladness.
9:18 And the Jews in the city Susa assembled also on the fourteenth
9:19 On this account then
9:20 And Mardochæus wrote these things in a book, and sent them to the Jews, as many as were in the kingdom of Artaxerxes, both them that were near and them that were afar off,
9:21 to establish these
9:22 for on these days the Jews obtained rest from their enemies: and
9:23 And the Jews consented
9:24 shewing
9:25 also how he went in to the king, telling
9:26 Therefore these days were called Phruræ, because of the lots; (for in their language they are called Phruræ;) because of the words of this letter, and
9:27 And
9:28 And these days of the Phruræ,
9:29 And queen Esther, the daughter of Aminadab, and Mardochæus the Jew, wrote all that they had done, and the confirmation of the letter of Phruræ.
9:31 And Mardochæus and Esther the queen appointed
9:32 And Esther established it by a command for ever, and it was written for a memorial.
10:1 And the king levied
10:2 And
10:3 And Mardochæus was viceroy to king Artaxerxes, and was a great man in the kingdom, and honoured by the Jews, and passed his life beloved of all his nation.
10:4 [And Mardochæus said, These things have been done of God.
10:5 For I remember the dream which I had concerning these matters: for not one particular of them has failed.
10:6 There was
10:7 And the two serpents are I and Aman.
10:8 And the nations are those
10:9 But
10:10 Therefore did he ordain two lots, one for the people of God, and one for all the
10:11 And these two lots came for an appointed season, and for a day of judgment, before God, and for all the nations.
10:12 And God remembered his people, and vindicated his inheritance.
10:13 And they shall observe these days, in the month Adar, on the fourteenth and on the fifteenth
10:14 In the fourth year of the reign of Ptolemy and Cleopatra, Dositheus, who said that he was a priest and a Levite, and Ptolemy his son, brought in the published letter of Phruræ, which they said existed, and