8:1 When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
8:2 And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
8:3 And Jesus put forth
8:4 And Jesus saith unto him,
8:5 And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion, beseeching him,
8:6 And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented.
8:7 And Jesus saith unto him,
8:8 The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.
8:9 For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this
8:10 When Jesus heard
8:11 And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.
8:12 But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
8:13 And Jesus said unto the centurion,
8:14 And when Jesus was come into Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s mother laid, and sick of a fever.
8:15 And he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose, and ministered unto them.
8:16 When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with
8:17 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare
8:18 Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to depart unto the other side.
8:19 And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.
8:20 And Jesus saith unto him,
8:21 And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
8:22 But Jesus said unto him,
8:23 And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.
8:24 And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves: but he was asleep.
8:25 And his disciples came to
8:26 And he saith unto them,
8:27 But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him!
8:28 And when he was come to the other side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.
8:29 And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?
8:30 And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine feeding.
8:31 So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.
8:32 And he said unto them,
8:33 And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils.
8:34 And, behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought
