1:1 The
1:2 Arise ye, and let us rise up against her to war.
1:3 Behold, I have made thee small among the Gentiles: thou art greatly dishonoured. The pride of thine heart has elated thee, dwelling
1:4 If thou shouldest mount up as the eagle, and if thou shouldest make thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord.
1:5 If thieves came in to thee, or robbers by night, where wouldest thou have been cast away? would they not have stolen
1:6 How has Esau been searched out, and
1:7 They sent thee to thy coasts: all the men of thy covenant have withstood thee; thine allies have prevailed against thee, they have set snares under thee: they have no understanding.
1:8 In that day, saith the Lord, I will destroy the wise men out of Idumea, and understanding out of the mount of Esau.
1:9 And thy warriors from Thæman shall be dismayed, to the end that man may be cut off from the mount of Esau.
1:10 Because of the slaughter and the sin
1:11 From the day that thou stoodest in opposition
1:12 And thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in the day of strangers; nor shouldest thou have rejoiced against the children of Juda in the day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have boasted in the day of
1:13 Neither shouldest thou have gone into the gates of the people in the day of their troubles; nor yet shouldest thou have looked upon their gathering in the day of their destruction, nor shouldest thou have attacked their host in the day of their perishing.
1:14 Neither shouldest thou have stood at the opening of their passages, to destroy utterly those of them that were escaping; neither shouldest thou have shut up his fugitives in the day of affliction.
1:15 For the day of the Lord is near upon all the Gentiles: as thou hast done, so shall it be
1:16 For as thou hast drunk upon my holy mountain,
1:17 But on mount Sion there shall be deliverance, and there shall be a sanctuary; and the house of Jacob shall take for an inheritance those that took them for an inheritance.
1:18 And the house of Jacob shall be fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau
1:19 And they
1:20 And this
1:21 And they that escape shall come up from mount Sion, to take vengeance on the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be the Lord's.