7:1 My son, keep my words, and hide with thee my commandments.
7:1a My son, honour the Lord, and thou shalt be strong; and fear none but him:
7:2 keep my commandments, and thou shalt live; and keep my words as the pupils of thine eyes.
7:3 And bind them on thy fingers, and write them on the table of thine heart.
7:4 Say that wisdom is thy sister, and gain prudence as an acquaintance for thyself;
7:5 that she may keep thee from the strange and wicked woman, if she should assail thee with flattering words.
7:6 For she looks from a window out of her house into the streets, at one whom she may see of the senseless ones, a young man void of understanding,
7:7 passing by the corner in the passages near her house,
7:8 and speaking, in the dark of the evening,
7:9 when there happens to be the stillness of night and of darkness:
7:10 and the woman meets him having the appearance of a harlot, that causes the hearts of young men to flutter.
7:11 And she is fickle, and debauched, and her feet abide not at home.
7:12 For at one time she wanders without, and at another time she lies in wait in the streets, at every corner.
7:13 Then she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said to him,
7:14 I have a peace-offering; to-day I pay my vows:
7:15 therefore I came forth to meet thee, desiring thy face; and I have found thee.
7:16 I have spread my bed with sheets, and I have covered it with double tapestry from Egypt.
7:17 I have sprinkled my couch with saffron, and my house with cinnamon.
7:18 Come, and let us enjoy love until the morning; come, and let us embrace in love.
7:19 For my husband is not at home, but is gone on a long journey,
7:20 having taken in his hand a bundle of money: after many days he will return to his house.
7:21 So with much converse she prevailed on him to go astray, and with the snares of her lips she forced him from the right path.
7:22 And he followed her, being gently led on, and that as an ox is led to the slaughter, and as a dog to bonds, or as a hart shot in the liver with an arrow:
7:23 and he hastens as a bird into a snare, not knowing that he is running for his life.
7:24 Now then, my son, hearken to me, and attend to the words of my mouth.
7:25 Let not thine heart turn aside to her ways:
7:26 for she has wounded and cast down many, and those whom she has slain are innumerable.
7:27 Her house is the way of hell, leading down to the chambers of death.
